Ali Shaheed Muhammad – of A Tribe Called Quest, the Ummah and Lucy Pearl fame – sat down on the Academy couch for a public interview with Cognito from Frolab as part of Boombox’s 5th annual celebration of the life and music of J Dilla and held in Los Angeles. Muhammad discussed the changing role of the DJ, his experiences as an A&R, sampling drama, and more.
Ali Shaheed 
Peace. How y’all doing?
Audience 
All right.
Ali Shaheed 
Good.
COGNITO 
Yes, yes.
Ali Shaheed 
What’s happening, Cognito?
COGNITO 
Good, man. Good to see you, brother.
Ali Shaheed 
Happy to be here.
COGNITO 
Word up, word up. So I’m going to take it back to 1989. As you all can tell by
the gray hairs on my chin, I was about 19-years-old around that time, working
for a record store out in DC and the store I worked at, we didn’t actually
carry hip hop vinyl. So I had to go to a competing record store to actually
buy my hip hop wax. And I remember going through, just digging, just looking
through stuff and back in them days, before mp3’s clearly, I would just buy
things just based off of the record cover alone. Sometimes I didn’t even know
who the group was but there might just be something about the cover that made
me buy it. I picked up a 12" and the 12" was “Description of a Fool” by A
Tribe Called Quest. I went home and I played that record and I played that
record and I played that record so much. There was something about it. Me not
even knowing the Gil Scott-Heron reference because back then we didn’t care where
it was sampled from. To be honest with you, I thought a lot of the hip hop
stuff that I was hearing at that time was like, “These are the most incredible
musicians ever. Like, oh my God. Like, whoa!” Going back to work in that
record store, I’m the only Black guy working there. All the rock people that
worked there, they would get all the rock promos and there would be all these
rap promos that they just passed down to me. One day I get a promo for
People’s Extensive Travels and the Path of
Rhythms. When I tell you I felt so good having that and
knowing I was the first kid in my school to have that joint, that album
changed my life in a way that a lot of hip hop records have changed my life.
But it’s something about that record that these cats were talking to me. They
were talking my language. Do you know what I’m saying? I’d listened to other
hip hop, I’d listened to Run DMC and stuff of that nature, but they always
seemed like older cats to me, which they probably were. But these were the
cats that were talking to me. I felt like I’m having a conversation with these
dudes and I never knew who they were. Do you know what I’m saying? So, thank
you.
[applause]
Straight up and down. Do you know what I’m saying?
Ali Shaheed 
Thank you. First of all, is the sound person close by? I’m extremely soft
spoken so can you cut me up?
COGNITO 
Turn my mic up.
Ali Shaheed 
Can you guys hear me in the back? If not, let him know. You can hear me? Okay.
I just wanted to make sure because we won’t be doing this again. This is it
for me. Thank you. I don’t really know what to say to that. It’s a lot of
years later and to hear you share your experiences, it’s touching and it’s
just kind of still bugged out after all the years, and all of the records, and
all of the cities to know that what we were doing as dreamers and striving for
something really affected people. You’re here. You say you’re from DC? I never
knew that. From my introduction to you, I don’t recall if it’s like New York
or Atlanta but I’ve seen you through the years and you’re here in LA and I
know that there are many people in LA that may be here right now and you’re
not from LA but it’s touched you and we’re still global and together. So it’s
just kind of bugged out. It’s a whole lot of things that are dancing through
my head but thank you for, everyone here, allowing us to be involved in your
life like that. Music is intimate. It really is. I’m still just very
appreciative to hear something like that. Yeah.
COGNITO 
So I don’t know who actually lost their wallet in El Segundo, but did you ever
find it?
[laughter]
Ali Shaheed 
 ”Got to get it. Got, got to get it.”
[applause]
COGNITO 
I’m looking over to a joint man that just really set off that album. Do you
know what I mean? Come to find out years later that this is the man who
actually produced it.
(music: A Tribe Called Quest – “Push It Along” / applause)
How old were you when you made that beat?
Ali Shaheed 
Oh wow. I’m tripping on other things you guys. I guess that’s what we’re here
for, to see what’s going to peel this open, right? Before I even answer that,
the Creator is amazing you know, sends blessings all the time. [points to
Maseo] Like, the fact that you’re sitting right there, just the way you
popped up in here.
COGNITO 
Shout out to Maseo over in the house.
Ali Shaheed 
Shout out to Maseo, Plug 3.
COGNITO 
It’s the whole caboodle.
Ali Shaheed 
It’s just like I often don’t think that the Creator has a sense of humor but
I’m starting to believe it a little bit. So the fact you’re sitting here, it
means a lot to me. I know that we were coming to this, but just the fact that
you’re sitting right there. I say that because I’m listening to that and I’m
hearing actually Afrika’s voice in the background from The Jungle
Brothers. It’s
just like, wow. I’m thinking of Mr. Long sliding me that drum break. I’m
thinking of a whole bunch of different things and even the opening was
somewhat controversial in the studio to jump it off because it’s just so kind
of like nerdy and whatnot but it was to symbolize the beginning of A Tribe
Called Quest and being like the baby’s offspring of The Jungle Brothers. That
particular song is very monumental for me and it just set off the whole record
and just hearing Q-Tip’s,
his voice is still just nasally but just smooth and it’s like you want to just
consume it. His cadence is crazy. We were 18 when we did that. That’s a long time ago.
Cognito 
Yeah. And thank you for not getting Q-Tip any Sudafed to like clear up that nasally
thing. Do you know what I’m saying? To think back, we’re talking ’88, ’89?
Ali Shaheed 
Yes.
COGNITO 
At that time, and I know because you were ’70s? 1970?
Ali Shaheed 
I was born in ’70.
COGNITO 
All right. I’m a 1970s kid and I know in 1989, ’88, I loved music and I
thought about making music but the way you all were creating music in New York
City, being the birthplace of hip hop, at 18-, 19-years-old, what was going
through your head? What is it about that city that helped form the creative
landscape that you had at that time?
Ali Shaheed 
New York City is such a different type of city than it was back then when we
were kids in comparison to Los Angeles. One thing that I’ve learned from
coming here throughout the years is that it’s just a different culture. You
have this really small city and you have like eight million people from all
different ethnic backgrounds and so there is an air of progressiveness to it
but, at the same time, there’s certain aspects that are covered and are
oppressive. It’s kind of a weird dynamic and paradox for that to exist where
you have this sort of sophistication and sort of advanced way of being
communal and really embracing. You can have neighborhoods where it could be
mostly Italian, but you got Blacks and Puerto Ricans in there and everybody’s
kicking it. There’s so much happening there and it’s kind of hard to really
explain but it was just this tension that existed, because so much has come
through New York City that may seem to be on a cutting edge of this sound, of
just life in general. The Civil Rights Movement was different in New York than
it was in the south. So it’s just all these different things and you have
these structures of buildings where most of the country things are spread out
and you got space at least. You got space. If you can do this and not touch
anyone, that feels good. Like on an airplane, we can’t do that. In New York
City when we’re living in these tenements, it’s tension. So it’s just kind of
like I said a weird kind of paradox between the two. You have financial
mammoths just across the bridge, but in these tenements and these squeezed up
buildings, neighborhoods without grass, neighborhoods without trees, it’s the
concrete jungle. It just creates a certain sort of a environment for life and
I guess it came out in the music. I think when we were making our music, which
was different than I want to say like the hip hop generation before us which,
for me, is only like a four to seven year span. It was way different than
that. James Brown was killing it and we were kind of like on that vibe way
early. So we weren’t really embraced coming with these sorts of grooves that
we were coming with, only because it was different. But when you have a vision
and you’re determined, you push through that and I think that’s what is
evident in hip hop as it began. It was through not having that the art form
was created and still persevering and trying to reach out and express the
oppression that’s happening in the ghettos. Coming together to try to escape
it, what Afrika Bambaataa did by bringing kids together to stop like whiling
out, stop robbing banks, find some other outlet. What we were doing with
Tribe, and I know the same things with De La and I know you’re here to tell
your story, it was the same sort of thing where you’re breaking through the
mundane and what you’re told you’re supposed to be, what you’re supposed to
do, and knowing somewhere in heart and mind that no, there’s supposed to be
more than this. And so it came out in the music.
COGNITO 
There was something else that happened around that time that was kind of
unheard of. Y’all released at VHS cassette. Why y’all laughing? Y’all know
what a VHS is right? Okay. All right. Don’t make me feel too old. Dang! But
that cassette was tour footage of y’all on tour with the Jungle Brothers
overseas and this is off the first album.
Ali Shaheed 
Yeah. I think, with not having a lot of information on, in hip hop it was so
new. How to do things was so new, you didn’t really have a blueprint but we in
a way, I use this word not in the full meaning of the word, but we idolized
groups like the Beatles, Jimi Hendrix. And we had learned that Jimi Hendrix
kind of went to Europe and did a jump off before things came back here to the
States and caught this wave. We were fortunate to have certain people in the
music industry kind of pay attention to us because of the Jungle Brothers,
because of De La, so the success those two groups had to want to see us be
catapulted in a proper way. We were like, “Let’s do something crazy. Let’s go
to London.” The only time I or Q-Tip had ever been there was just to shoot a
Jungle Brothers video. We were there maybe six hours. We were on a plane and
some hotel that was like the size of this couch and then shipped back off to
the US. I remember the A&R to this day, actually he’s running the show at
Sony right now, I always had a grudge against him because he treated us so
badly, but...
Maseo
[From audience] Me too, I remember.
Ali Shaheed 
And it’s nothing personal to him now but, you know, just completely
understanding now what his job was. We just wanted to go to Europe and have it
documented. It was interesting because the good thing with cameras, you don’t
have to show everything. In France in particular, we were opening, I think it
was KRS on that bill, and there wasn’t really a warm reception for A Tribe
Called Quest. I don’t even think the first album was out yet. So even here in
LA, I have to admit, when we first came here, there was not a lot of love for
us.
COGNITO 
Hence why you lost your wallet and never got it back.
Ali Shaheed 
Is that what it was, it’s the inside Califiornia joke. Let’s get these dudes
right here. Got ‘em from Brooklyn. I should have saw it coming and I just
missed it completely.
[laughter]
But that’s what the deal was with that with VHS. My mind instantly said
LaserDisc when you said VHS.
COGNITO 
Oh, you have it on LaserDisc?
Ali Shaheed 
Yeah. I had the joint on LaserDisc. But it was really cool because...
COGNITO 
That’s pre-Blu Ray, for you all.
[laughter]
Ali Shaheed 
We were able to look back at what we had accomplished and it gave us more of a
drive, a determination of really like just hit it hard and to bring our art
form, our side, our story, our look to the people. I think that it was good.
It’s like New York is a very tough place and lots of cities in America is
tough when it comes to embracing something new in music but it’s just
something about Europe, they will ask you questions and really go deep into
your art. You need that sometimes to really see what’s inside and see if there
is something that you are missing or that you are overinflated about. I think
it was excellent for us to come back home and take that experience and tighten
up our stage game.
COGNITO 
Were you a DJ before Tribe? Were you DJing your freshman dance or homecoming?
Ali Shaheed 
Not the freshman dance, but yes, I was DJing actually in my neighborhood. I
got a little bit of a reputation, which was cool. There were like six of us on
a block, Decatur Street, Brooklyn. I was the only one who didn’t have a set of
turntables. I had a mixer. My mom, she saved up enough to get this Realistic
mixer made by Radio Shack. Yeah, always right. I love my mom.
Maseo
[inaudible from audience] 
Ali Shaheed 
Exactly. [laughs] I treasured that but in addition to that, I had these
little, it wasn’t Fisher Price but it was not an official DJ set up. So there
were some guys on the block, specifically this guy named Mark. His parents had
dough and they gave Mark everything. So we used to pile up into Mark’s
basement and battle, battle, battle. I would save up my money, buy records.
There’s the other kid named Reg. He bought mad records and Mark. There was
this other guy named Keith. Keith had equipment and records but because I
didn’t have the full for real DJ set up, I was on their set. I was just like
very much focused. I’m in here until their parents kick us out. We got five
hours to get it in and I was just really focused on learning what it was I
needed to learn and go home and sit there with my Realistic mixer and go, “Ma,
you really got to get me some turntables.” Belt-drive turntables were the up
and coming and I have to say, any DJs out here in the room, you guys know
about the belt? You’re young enough to appreciate those. It was really not the
best turntables compared to the Technics 1200, which is the master of
turntables, but trying to explain that to your mom. It’s like trying to
explain an mp3 player to your great grandmother. It’s like, “What are you
talking about?” So she did her best, she really did. But all of that, I’m
saying just caused me to really focus, focus, focus. I don’t remember what she
got me. She got me something. It was a little step up. It wasn’t the belt-
drive joints that everyone else had, but I continued to just stay in my room
and practice and practice and practice. So I got a little bit of a reputation
in the neighborhood for DJing and I don’t even know how Q-Tip discovered that
because if you haven’t seen the documentary, he and I met in junior high
school and he had said to me, “I got this crew. I heard you pretty good. Why
don’t you make me a mix tape.” I was like, “Okay.” So I made the tape and I
don’t remember what I put in there but I had mad records. He liked it and
that’s how things kind of formed, like we formed the group.
COGNITO 
Now, at that time, the DJ was a very integral part of the creative process in
some of the most classic joints of hip hop at that time. Now it seems that’s
kind of gone to the wayside. Not a lot of rap records that we hear today, the
DJ doesn’t get that shine but back then, the cuts were almost as important as
the lyrics, almost as important as the beat on a lot of songs. I’m going to
play a joint right now that, to me, I knew the cuts before I actually knew the
lyrics to the song.
(music: A Tribe Called Quest – “Clap Your Hands” / applause)
Where do you think it’s gone? Like, what happened to that? Where did it go?
Where did it go?
Ali Shaheed 
I wish I had the answer to that. Honestly, I can only guess that technology
somewhat played a role into the shift of DJs and other people making music. I
think somewhat like music, it just evolves. It happens and there are certain
people who continue to display the core of the group so that something is not
lost in human communication. It really doesn’t matter what instrument you
play, at some point, you get away from some other important aspects. For hip
hop, that’s the foundation. So it’s upsetting to know that there’s not enough
of an emphasis on that sort of thing. I want to shout out DJ Rhettmatic here because...
COGNITO 
Beat Junkies...World Famous 
Ali Shaheed 
He’s certainly keeping it alive and there are people who keep it alive. I
don’t really know how to answer that question. I don’t know if I have the
answer for it. I, myself, I get to a point where even when I’m making music,
I’m like, “You know you got to put something on it.” But I don’t want to over
do it because, at some point, I want to say like mid-’90s, you would hear rubs
on everything, like everything, even a commercial that didn’t have a hip hop
background. It was the kick drum rub and it just got to a point where it was
like is this what it’s become? I tend to have this thing, this challenge of
not doing what people expect or want and that’s probably my own internal
struggle and maybe some other DJs and producers out there have that. I’m
thinking about when you asked that question and I have like Barry White in my
head and I don’t know why, but I think because if Barry White was in our
golden era age, he probably would have been a DJ. James Brown would have been
a DJ. Miles would have been a DJ. So I don’t think that there’s too much of a
departure. It’s just a matter of how being a DJ is being applied. There’s
certain type of blends, certain type of mixes. There’s turntablism, there’s
different sub factors. I don’t know what word to use that encompass being a
DJ. I think it is being applied in hip hop for certain people and it’s still
being pushed.
COGNITO 
We going to push.
Ali Shaheed 
Wait, I just thought about it. You know what happened? Rahzel and Scratch,
that’s what happened. I’m just teasing because I love them. Really, sincerely,
it was just a joke. They are dope and you know you would hear something Rahzel
did and it was like, “Yo, I can’t do that.” It would mess you up. I don’t
know. All right.
COGNITO 
Word, that’s what’s up. You not only produced joints for, and during your
Tribe era, but you’ve done some classics that cats probably don’t even know
you did. I’m going to play a joint right now that’s probably going to mess a
lot of you all’s heads up to even know that he did this beat. There we go.
(music: Fu-Schnickens – “La Schmoove” / applause)
Yeah, that was my guy.
Ali Shaheed 
Thank you.
COGNITO 
How was that break? What was it at that point when clearly you were making
beats for your own crew, but then you go outside of the crew and start doing
joints?
Ali Shaheed 
Good question. It was more to strengthen the crew.
COGNITO 
Because they kind of came out how you all did under Jungle Brothers and De La
and they weren’t necessarily part of Native Tongue but they were kind of an
extension of...
Ali Shaheed 
Yeah, they were definitely an extension. It seemed like when the Fu-Schnickens
had come, it seemed like a couple of decades behind us, even though it really
wasn’t. Maybe four or five years. But for me, it was just like Tribe is
growing and building and that was just a matter of building up the brand.
That’s why it says, produced by A Tribe Called Quest. It was just to build up
the brand.
COGNITO 
Were you all thinking in that manner? It seems like that’s how a lot of things
are being done today, like marketing wise people were looking at what they’re
doing musically and they’re creating their brand before they’ve even
manufactured anything. Do you know what I’m saying? So at that time, is that
what you all were thinking?
Ali Shaheed 
Yeah, we were still fresh and new so much to the point that we would drive our
managers crazy because we didn’t want to go on the road. For us, we knew it
was all about the music. The music is the most important thing and if you get
the music right, then you can always go out and deliver and touch people and
have that sort of experience. But if the music isn’t correct, then it’s like
everything that you’re doing is for nothing. That was more of I think us
really establishing our culture of saying, “We have to put music out. We have
to just stay in the studio and record.” There was a lot that we wanted to do
with the brand. Certain things were realized at that time and certain things
was just innately moving one foot in front of the other. You know it’s going
to get you somewhere. You’re not sure where but the only way you’re going to
get there is if you do that and they say that the hardest step in the thousand
mile journey is the first step. That’s what that was, just trying to
strengthen the brand and move it in places that we could only dream of like
where it is now. The success that artists have now, that’s what we were
pushing for. That’s what we were striving for. To see the type of stage that
Kanye even delivers. We were talking about those sorts of things, again going
back to the bands that we studied, looking at the Beatles who, to us, were the
ultimate band because they got everything that they wanted and dictated to
their record company to the extent that they became their record company.
Their managers, really, it was them. Something that we also learned from De
La, they really early on empowered themselves with aligning themselves with a
strong manager. It’s just certain things that you watch people around you do.
We watched certain things that Jungle was doing and how they got the Warner
Brothers deal and that was like massive, major. All these little elements that
you try to use to get you to that big, big dream. Like the stage that Kanye
had, we were talking about that’s what we want. We want that kind of a
understanding from the people who were pushing our music, and they really
didn’t get it. Our entire dream didn’t come to fruition but it was the start,
and that’s the most important thing.
COGNITO 
So you bring up record labels. You also had a stint as an A&R and tell us
about that experience.
Ali Shaheed 
That experience was a challenging one internally because we have this creative
thing going where it’s about making the music is important, but at the same
time we’re building a brand. Fighting the record companies seemed to be our
every day. I thought that the best way for us to really have an understanding
and to advance ourselves beyond these obstacles that we were having with the
record company would be to go work for a record company. A friend of mine
said, “Hey, Quincy Jones is looking for an A&R.” I was like, “For real?
How do I get in?” I had to have a job interview. Two, in fact. That was a real
learning experience because, again, it was kind of separating from the
recording just a little bit. Not that much. I was in the studio every day but
just having to separate myself to understand what this whole corporate
structure was about and how to get things done because Q-Tip and I wanted to
sign our own artists and put them out, like Vinia Mojica was like one of the
artists, she was like number one in the chamber for us to really get that
cracking but we needed to have a real know how, so I did that. It was real
corporate. [laughter] You have to understand, and I don’t know how much time we have, but
this is probably for me one thing that I really want to convey to all of the
musicians here, not even musicians, just whatever it is you’re doing in life,
when you have an idea like making music or forming a business and you form
alliances and partnerships, you have, I think, maybe this unspoken interaction
in part of the relationship that we talked about this thing together so we’re
moving together for this particular thing. But people have their own agendas.
It can be extremely frustrating if you’re not aware of the agenda. If you’re
not aware of the language of the environment that you’re in, it doesn’t matter
what type of relationship it is. If you don’t know the language that the
person is speaking, there’s going to be a point where you’re looking at each
other like, “Huh? What? Huh? What? I don’t understand.” Or one person may feel
offended, only because they don’t speak the language and you just did
something that completely violated whatever they live and stand for.
Maseo
Protocol, that’s the corporate term. Protocol.
Ali Shaheed 
Protocol. Word!
[laughter]
I was in an environment that I thought that I understood the language and I
did not. When a good friend, who happens to have been a publicists for the
group, Leyla Turkin, passes me a Black Eyed Peas tape and I’m like, “Yo, let’s
sign this.” They’re like, “Don’t get that.” Or when Corey Glover, who was the
lead singer for Living Colour was breaking off doing his solo joint, I’m like,
“Yo, let’s get that.” They’re like, “Nah.” When you hear that Common is about
to break away from Relativity and you want to be in there and I met with
Common and like, “Yo, what do you need to get out of the situation?” He put it
on the table. “Yo, let’s go get that.” “No.” You start to look at the
environment and go, “What’s going on here? Am I not speaking the language?” I
have faith and understanding for choosing my words cautiously, obviously.
Maseo 
I know.
Ali Shaheed 
It becomes somewhat disheartening and, depending on the cause that you’re in
and what you really believe, like you thought everyone was here and you’re
going all hard, it can really just knock the wind out of you for a minute and
you’re completely passed out and unconscious. That’s what kind of happened
with that situation and here it is, I’m battling with my brothers, “I need to
do this for the us situation.” Then that’s the kind of environment that I’m
in. It was like two struggles. It was ’96, ’97, Beats, Rhymes and Life
album. There was a lot going on at that time. Languages was just in a lot of
situations, we were all speaking different languages. It came out in the music
and those other people went on to be superstars. Also, The Neptunes because
they were just popping off and I was trying to secure them for the label to be
in-house producers. I remember one of my bosses said, “As long as you are
first to the party, it doesn’t matter.” And that’s the record company
mentality at that time. I don’t know if he said that to make me feel better,
but being first to the situation to finding an artist is not really important.
I believe in these artists and these people and I believe I’m in a house that
understands music and is really trying to push the art form and the culture
and all these things and you have an artist-driven record company, owned by an
artist. It’s a huge wake up call that even though that’s the case, there’s a
protocol. It’s kind of like, I’ve never been locked up, but I have several
friends who have been locked up. They know my heart, my mind. They know how
strong of a person that I am and they were like shocked. When you get indoors,
the rules are different. You will be challenged. So it’s no different in life
and where we are now. You really learn some things. I learned a lot in being
in that situation and I’m very thankful that they hired me. I was up against
someone else who would have gotten the job and I think he would have taken the
losses in stride because he worked for another company and he was cool. But
for me, I needed that job to just really strengthen me for the other things
that were about to happen. Like I said, all those guys went on to be
superstars and I could just sit back and go, “Yup, could have signed them.
Yup, super star. Mad money. Icons. Shaking hands with Presidents. Okay.”
COGNITO 
You seem to get through that time period pretty well because from around that
time, I guess after Love Movement, you started doing some more outside production and
you did something that sounded like this.
(music: D’Angelo – “Brown Sugar” / applause)
Ali Shaheed 
Thank you.
COGNITO 
That transition, going from doing the type of hip hop that you were doing to
working with live musicians and you went on to do so many other joints, Mary J. Blige, doing remixes for Scritti Politti out of London, old ’80s cats, you
know what I’m saying? Maroon 5. Doing all kinds of stuff. Do you know what I
mean? You also went on to do a group with some incredible cats. Raphael
Saadiq, Tony! Toni! Toné!, Dawn Robinson from En Vogue, you all created Lucy
Pearl. Talk about that experience in just going from one group that was at
that status that they were to doing a whole other genre of music in a way.
Ali Shaheed 
That whole process again, just thinking about the Creator and the Creator’s
movement and blessings, really it just started back when I was a kid. My mom
listened to a lot of different music and that always stayed with me and it
always pushed me to be open. I grew up in Brooklyn, New York, but my mom would
send me away to camps far away, just so I could get out of the hood and I
didn’t like her much for that at the time.
Audience member 
El Segundo.
Ali Shaheed 
But my mom, in her wisdom, understood that there was more to the neighborhood
than the streets of Brooklyn and she wanted me to experience and be exposed to
different things. That whole kind of mixture of movement of different artists
is just the culmination of that my mom, really, doing her job. Thank you, mom.
To expose me to the world and educating me. Different people, different
experiences and just to try to be open to it. You may have your own belief
system and your own ideas and foundation of what you’re supposed to be, how
you should move, but just to be open to it and the one beautiful thing about
music is I found that when I don’t understand other people, music is a
language that I understand. It just resonates with me, even if there are no
words on there. There’s chords and the accompaniment or arranging of certain
instruments just, on a frequency level, it touches us with some sort of
electric kind of interaction. I leave myself open to that. The
D’Angelo thing,
he’s an incredible singer and even D is a crazy hip hop head and his music is
just hip hop to me, period. Point blank. With that voice of his on top of it
and Scritti Politti, you’re funny, from the ‘80s. Yeah. I had Scritti Politti
records when I was...
Audience member 
 “Perfect Way” was the joint.
Ali Shaheed 
When I got that call, I was like, “For real?” Like, “Perfect Way” was the
joint. I’m like, “What am I going to do?” I always have this nervous factor
when I get calls. I’m like, “I have no idea what I’m going to do. I’m going to
mess this up. This is the worst. They should have never called me, like
never.” The Creator does what the Creator does. Even “Brown Sugar” was a
complete accident. We were working on something completely different that D
and I had picked out. I’ve been a Mac user for 24 years and my Mac, I’ve never
touched a PC. Heard the stories about the bugs, but I was having issues in the
studio. I thought there were actually ghosts in the room because this one
particular room in Battery [Studios], the C room, things just happened in
there and I had learned from Raphael Saadiq, in working with him early on,
working with the Tone’s, they kept tape running. I kept tape running and I was
just like, “Man, we’re wasting money. This guy is sitting here. He’s playing
his keyboard. When is this cat going to get his business together.” I’m
looking at the engineer. He’s clueless because I’m using equipment that they
were not using and I embrace technology, so I’m into buying stuff and trying
it out and so it was really all on me to fix this program. Even talking about
programs and stuff like, it was just too early in the game. Now it’s natural.
Everyone uses Logic, Pro Tools, Cakewalk and all the other ones, but back then,
it was just early and stuff wasn’t working and D started playing this one bass
line and I was like, “What is that?” He was like, “I don’t know. Just waiting
for you to finish.” In 15 minutes, the song was done because I had just deaded
whatever what was going on and got to this. Lucy Pearl, again just being open
to the conversation, to the experience and Raphael is like a big brother to me
and actually that wasn’t supposed to be doing Robinson. That was supposed to
be D’Angelo but he was working on Voodoo and he just couldn’t commit at the
time. If you guys really study Raphael Saadiq. He thinks a lot and you hear it in
the music, but if you really look at him, you see the thought process in every
Tony! Toni! Toné! album. If you look at their records, if you look at their
stage performance, because if you look at what he’s doing on his solo thing,
he thinks. Lucy Pearl was like him thinking and going, “I’m going to shoot it
out there. Tell me what you think.” When he said the words, it was just like,
“Let’s do it.” And the rest is history on that. So you just got to be open. I
am often DJing around the world, I’m thankful and blessed to be able to still
do this thing that I love to do, but I have some die hard hip hop heads who
don’t want to hear Lucy Pearl. They don’t care about Maroon 5. They could care
less about anything, just keep it hip hop, period, point blank. In this
particular era, thank you very much, I’ll have a good night and if not,
there’s going to be a lot of fuck you notes on your DJ booth. I love that kind
of situation because I’m like, “Well, that’s not how I was raised so if you
here in my house, oh man, you’re going to get it because I’m going to play
Talking Heads or whatever.” That’s what I do. I love music. It’s just me being
in those situations is me being me, trying one, to go against the rules, not
do what everyone thinks I should do. That sort of thing. I’m very rebellious.
It’s to my detriment. It really is. I’m learning that now at 41 that I should
stop being so rebellious against certain things and go with the flow but
there’s just something in me that just goes, “I know if I did that, it would
be okay, but I want to be beyond okay. Okay is cool, but I just want to be at
peace, knowing I pushed the limits in some capacity with the art form.” We are
all given new canvases every day that the Creator lets the sun rise on us and
there are certain things that we have to do that’s somewhat conditioned in
movement in your daily basis, but then there’s other things that you can throw
on that canvas that’s just enlightened your life or someone else’s life
differently. That’s just my approach to music is just like that.
COGNITO 
We’re at the point where we’re going to open up the floor for some questions
from you all. Is there anyone out there that has a question? Somebody’s going
to pass you the mic.
Audience member 
Concerning the creative process, being that you’ve been involved so long in
it, what are some of the things that have helped you push past a creative
plateau? Let’s say you’ve reached the point where you’re like, “Man, I’m at
the same place. I need to get through it. Should I just stop? Should I keep
going?” What, for you as an artist, helped you to push past that point?
Ali Shaheed 
Always being open to listening to different things. I’m inspired by people who
come after me and to not be closed off. There are certain things that I think
may irritate us all in certain areas of music and genres of music, but I still
kind of keep that, “Yeah, I don’t like this business that’s going on in this
song, but this is something that’s just like wow, I didn’t think about that.”
You know, and studying that sort of thing what someone else is doing.
Sometimes, it’s like I said, it’s mistakes. I just had actually two weeks
apart, I lost a hard drive just two weeks ago. I was in Toronto doing this
John Legend session and it was just like the first time I was sitting with him
and I’m like, “My hard drive is gone. What on earth are we going to do now? I
back everything up, but the back up is in Brooklyn.” I just wanted to leave
and be like, “Yo, sorry B. You just came to Toronto for nothing. Sorry.” I
lost inspiration but the Creator’s like, “No, you’re going to get through it,”
and actually made a banging joint for him with him and my boy, Doc [McKinney].
There’s just little things that happen in life and you just have to look at
them and when you’re having a cloudy day, look at something different and go,
“Yeah, it’s raining over here but this rain may be bringing something that’s
beautiful that I’m just not aware of yet.” Or it may be even too sunny, like,
“Yo, too much sun. I need some shade.” But just to be aware and open. I don’t
know if that helps.
COGNITO 
Any other questions?
Audience member 
Got one right here. First of all, it’s an honor to hear you speak and it’s
really inspirational. Tribe was the reason I got into hip hop.
Ali Shaheed 
Thank you.
Audience member 
I remember before Midnight Marauders came out, I was waiting and waiting and
waiting for it to come out and I just remember hearing you guys were having
some trouble with sample clearance, things like that. I’m a producer myself. I
wonder if you could touch upon the dramas that you went through with all the
samples that you guys used, where that sits now, and also, where you’re at now
when you create music and do you trip on worrying about sampling? Do you have
certain rules that you use? Things like that.
Ali Shaheed 
The nightmares of samples still haunt you. Any musician who’s really making a
living off of their music, there are like two vital months you’re relying on
when you’re not touring especially and that’s, what is that, March, April-ish
and September, October, because that’s when your royalty checks come. Just
last year, I saw a huge depletion for some samples from 15 years ago. I was
really relying on that check. Those are the lessons you learn and you could
not have known that back then. You still get knocks on the door saying, “You
used our music,” and especially with the documentary, it’s just turning the
spotlight on us a little bit more and someone’s grandson is now 18, 19, and
they’re a hardcore digger and, “Yo, granddad or grandma, that’s your joint.
We all, friends, let’s work it out.” And you’re like, “Oh! Yeah, we’re going to
work it out.” Those things are still happening and back then, it didn’t
discourage us, it just made us want to go, “Alright, they’re onto us so okay
we got to do this. We have to clear this. Let’s figure out a way to get around
it.” So you start chopping up your samples and just manipulating them. Love
when that filter came and that MPC. The filter was just like, “Thank you,
God.” Especially back then, the filter was like you covered some things up and
no one could really identify it unless they was doing what you were doing.
Technology, I guess, helps cultivate the whole sampling thing and also it
inspired me to really pick up playing bass seriously and then moving onto
guitar and then moving onto the piano and drums. That’s the rhythm section and
for hip hop that’s really all you need. It has allowed me to say, “Okay, I
don’t have any children. I would like to have children. I want them to be able
to eat off of this and they’re not going to eat as much if I sample everything
so let me find a way to be inspired.” Because it’s always been inspiration.
The first needle to the groove was just because I was a kid listening to the
records like this like, “Man, what are they thinking about? What are they
doing?” I’m still like that. “What are they doing?” I challenge myself because
I can easily just throw the needle into the groove, chop it up and I’m like,
“No, there’s emotions. There’s more stuff happening here.” It forces me to
play and explore my own self and, guess what? I made that no samples and
someone’s going to sample you sort of a thing. So it’s just like keeping the
conversation of music moving forward. I get a lot of criticism from my loved
ones like, “Why are you not sampling?” I mean, like home loved ones. “It’s
better when you sample. You know that, right? You really do know that?”
[laughter]
Like, “Why are you, that’s that right there. Why do you go over here?” I did
explain that I kind of like to go against the grain and go against what I’m
supposed to do. I’m aware of it and I don’t know how to get around it but it’s
a struggle.
Audience member 
There we go. You emphasized earlier about building up your team and, even when
you produce things yourself, it says produced by A Tribe Called Quest. One of
the things I always wondered, even with the albums, what was the dynamic
between you, Tip, Phife, Jarobi and
even when Dilla came into the creative process for the last two albums? How
did you guys play off each other and how was the dynamic when you were
creating those records?
Ali Shaheed 
It’s an awesome kind of energy. How do I explain this? I went to a concert a
couple of months ago and I saw Gary Clark, Jr. play. There were only two
people on the planet I wanted to call and go, “Oh my God!” Q-Tip was one and
Raphael Saadiq was the other. There are just people who you don’t really have
to say much, it’s just like you’re there, you’re vibing, you’re thinking the
same thing. It was a lot of fun. Jarobi is extremely funny and he and Phife
together are like Abbott and Costello. They greatly entertained us. It was
just a love affair, really. I don’t know how to explain it. When the Creator
blessed us to get Dilla’s demo, that was just like he came at the right time
because we were at a point where, not that everything was routine, but there
were certain aspects of our life that were just so routine and we needed
something to push us in a different direction. Had we kept going this way,
only the Creator knows and I think that’s why Dilla came in and sort of
resuscitated us a little bit. It’s like he was inspired by us. But he had his
own everything, his own universe. He was in our world, but it was more like we
were in his world because it was just like, “How does he come in and do this
so quick?” We’re just sitting here for hours chopping and doing all this and
Dilla would just come in and ‘boop, boop, boop’, and go back upstairs and
you’re like, “I’m sitting there for weeks and months trying to achieve that
what he just did in minutes.” That was fun because it was sort of like a
competitive pushing each other on in a very positive way. It was just a great
environment, great experience.
COGNITO 
Word.
Ali Shaheed 
Do you have another question? A couple more questions?
COGNITO 
We got to move on. We got to wrap it up, B. But in parting, man, thank you for
coming and speaking because watching the documentary, we didn’t get to hear
you speak. It’s good to get you in this forum to actually speak your clout. Do
you know what I’m saying?
Ali Shaheed 
Thank you. I was shown that what I said was enough so I didn’t have to speak
more. So thank you for giving me an opportunity in a forum to speak a little
bit more. I don’t like speaking but I actually do love the sharing of
knowledge. I said to you guys, I’d rather [see] we set up some stuff and we
can have a back and forth kind of exchange like, “This is how you program,
this is how I program.” I’m that kind of dude. I love this sort of
interaction. It’s more important than talking about other things I think
people want to talk about. I’m just really about really sharing knowledge. So
thank you for giving Red Bull Music Academy the balls. Just anyway. No, I just
heard a story about, what’s his name? Dietrich [Mateschitz], the owner, it
could be a rumor, if anyone here from Red Bull knows and is cool with the NDA
and they can share this information with me about he has like this property in
Austria that’s really super amazing and it has like water and all this stuff.
Have you been there? I mean, I’m just really interested. I’ve never had a Red
Bull but I’m just really interested.
[laughter]
The company, it is a billion dollar company that celebrates energy and people
doing this and they’re doing a positive thing. I’d like to see more exposure
on the Red Bull site for the Red Bull Music Academy personally. There’s a lot
of other things on that website. I would love to see a link for the Red Bull
Music Academy because what you guys are doing for hip hop specifically is
awesome and empowering. They need to get the message.
COGNITO 
Well, there’s redbullmusicacademy.com and they got their own space.
Ali Shaheed 
You got to do that, like when you’re not given certain things, you’ve got to
be like, “Yo, I’m going to take this record here, back it up here, and then
take this record here, back it up there. I don’t need my drummer. I just got
my own drum beat going.” So you have to do those things. But at some point,
you’re going to really want support to move and advance. We’re trying to
advance the culture so it would be dope to have like a Red Bull Music Academy
link on the Red Bull website. That’s all I’m saying.
COGNITO 
And on that note, we want to thank Ali Shaheed Muhammed for coming and
speaking with us.
Ali Shaheed 
Thank you everyone.
