London’s Ben UFO started out on pirate radio station Sub FM in 2007, playing dubstep alongside friends, producers and DJs Pangaea and Pearson Sound. After being sent new music every week, the trio started the Hessle Audio label that same year, through which they joined the dots of the UK underground between house, techno, jungle and drum & bass as the global dubstep scene was exploding. Since then Ben has graduated to a fortnightly show on flagship London radio station Rinse FM and a near-constant touring schedule. 
In this talk at the 2014 Red Bull Music Academy, he touched on the label’s early days, making the weird accessible, and outsider house.
Lauren Martin 
Perfect. Welcome to another one of the Red Bull Music Academy Tokyo lectures.
On the couch next to me is people like to use the phrase “a DJ’s DJ” but I
like the phrase “a people’s DJ”: It’s Ben UFO.
[applause]
Ben UFO 
Hello.
Lauren Martin 
I think it’s good that we’re starting to talk today by the fact that we’ve
all got to see you play last night, so at least some people have a sense about
what Ben’s about as a DJ and it’s not just all a theoretical talk about
playing records. But even though last night was a success and everyone really
enjoyed themselves I think it’s quite interesting that your very start of your
story success was born of a slight failure. Do you mind telling us about how
you started DJing and what the story behind that was?
Ben UFO 
I had been DJing for quite a long time, went to university and met couple of
people there that I started DJing with, and we decided to try and get a radio
show. Radio is something that I’ve done pretty much every week for the past
seven years but we were turned down for the first show that we applied to
which was just like, a tiny student union radio station who more or less told us that
what we were doing was completely irrelevant to anything that they were
interested in. So we kind of just applied to an Internet station instead and
started broadcasting from our bedrooms, and that was kind of the beginning of
everything for us.
Lauren Martin 
And to give a bit of context, for those who aren’t from the UK, where were you
all at the time and how did you all come together musically?
Ben UFO 
I grew up in London, all of us met properly in Leeds where we went to
university. I met David, Pearson Sound, in the queue for FWD>> in London. It transpired that he was going to come up to the
same university as me so we got talking and he started sending me some of his
first tracks, which were pretty bad. [laughter] And I ended up living with Kev [McAuley, Pangaea] in the
second year, he was the only person that I knew in Leeds that had a pair of
turntables, which we’d set up on the floor of his room. So we’d spent a couple
of hours mixing terrible... Well, alternately terrible and all-right drum & bass
records. He played the bad ones. Kneeling on the floor next to his bed, it was
quite strange. We kind of discovered dubstep at a relatively similar time and
started going out to nights together, and that was that.
Lauren Martin 
I find it interesting that your relationship with the dubstep scene and music... You’re from London but you were staying in Leeds at the time; for the sake of
context, the dubstep scene and sound in the UK was borne of a very small pool of
people, producers and DJs and club promoters. Very few venues would play it
and it was a very kind of narrow geography as a sound in South London. How did
you experience that early on by being a London ex-pat in Leeds, as it were?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, you’re right, it was a really hyper specific sound that initially was
only really played in a few rooms around London, gradually spread a little bit
to Bristol, Leeds was one of the other cities that it spread to relatively
quickly. But yeah, we very much felt like outsiders not being in London. I would
come back home, go to as many nights as possible, and try to meet people, but
it still felt like we weren’t really in the heart of what was going on. And
certainly, when we started DJing, we were just coming from that perspective of
fans and people that really liked the music and wanted to play it. There
was no desire to get involved because we didn’t feel like that was possible,
really. It was something that was happening somewhere else. So we started to
put nights on, we started doing this radio show, but it wasn’t a scene that we
were involved with, we weren’t in the middle of it, we were somewhere
parallel.
Lauren Martin 
And I find it interesting that your first radio show was named after a Loefah
tune, “Ruffage.” So it’s all very slavish towards the dubstep sound. But
interestingly, once you started the radio show people started sending in
tracks. Could you explain a little bit about the relationship between your
listeners and the radio show in Leeds once these tracks started to roll in?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, well like I said, we were very much fans of this music, so when people started
to send us music that they were writing for the show it sort of made me feel
as though there were these little pockets of people around the world that felt
the same way that we did. That was kind of the first thing that gave me an idea that
what we were doing might be slightly broader than I thought, it might have
more of a relevance to other people than I thought. I think because we fell
slightly outside of the scene at the time we also felt able to draw from a
slightly wider pool of music which maybe made what we were doing relevant to
more people. I think that’s probably why we developed the regular core of
listeners that we did and I think that’s why those listeners started sending
us music to play on the show.
Lauren Martin 
And once this music started to roll in, I’m interested in how people talk
about the Hessle [Audio, Ben UFO’s label] sound and the Ruffage [a club night in Leeds] sound. And once these tracks started to
get sent in, did you start to see patterns of what sort of music was coming in
that was influenced by dubstep that you thought, “Hang on, this is something
completely new that we should pick up on”?
Ben UFO 
I mean, do people in the new room know the records that we’ve released? I don’t really
know how to answer that question until I know whether or not people have heard
the tracks. The stuff that we were playing on the radio at the time was kind
of falling between dubstep, garage, and stuff that was maybe a bit house-ier
and faster techno that we were hearing that was fitting in with that sound.
And the music that our listeners were sending in was very much informed by
that, I think. We were being sent quite a lot of predominantly garage-
influenced music, which wasn’t particularly big in London at the time. And the
first record that we put out is a really good example of that. I think it was
coming at a slightly different angle to most of the other stuff that was coming out.
Lauren Martin 
I think we should play it, actually. I think we should play the first track on
Hessle Audio. It’s TRG, “Put You Down,” yeah?
Ben UFO 
That’s right.
Lauren Martin 
For the sake of context, this was released in 2007, so this is kind of
happening at a very interesting crossroads in the dubstep sound. So yeah,
we’ll let you hear it and you can understand what we’re talking about.
(music: TRG – “Put You Down” / applause) 
I really like the attention to detail of killing the track, you didn’t just
switch it off, that’s a DJ. So that’s TRG, “Put You Down,” which was the first
release on Hessle Audio, which was the label that you started with David and
Kev, who are Pearson Sound and Pangaea. Pearson Sound then was Ramadanman,
early on. A lot of what gets discussed with Hessle Audio as it started out as a
sound was that it was a label born of a very interesting time in dubstep and
what UK dance music generally was doing, which was the start of the UK funky
sound; house music was starting to come into what dubstep was doing; and 2007
was also the year that dubstep start getting put on festival stages. So in
terms of UK music, dubstep was at a real crossroads. How do you think Hessle
kind of tackled that early on?
Ben UFO 
It was very much born of its time. Like you said, 2007 was a time where a lot
of different stuff was happening, the music was kind of exploding in a way that
it hadn’t before. The sound was changing, it was broadening, getting more
festival-friendly, like you said. I think most importantly there was just a
lot of momentum behind it, so if you are trying to get involved with a scene
that is expanding it’s obviously going to be a little bit easier. There’s
going to be infrastructure there to help you out. For us, we were lucky enough
to find a distributor that was willing to work with 19-year-olds that had no
idea what they were doing. Like we wrote a sort of really innocent-sounding
letter to ST Holdings who distributed us for a long time, who recently closed.
It was David that took the initiative to do that. But yeah, they just guided
us through the whole process, held our hand through the whole thing, which is
something that I think wouldn’t happen if you were trying to get involved in
something that was already established, already massive, already slightly
saturated. So yeah, it wasn’t that we were so much tackling what was going on,
we were just fans that wanted to get involved and it so happened that we were
in the right place to do it because there was an infrastructure in place to
help us.
Lauren Martin 
And once the label started to pick up a little bit of momentum as well, what
was the chronology of you being in Leeds? Because everybody thinks of dubstep
as London and Bristol in the UK as the big cities. But for the sake of the
context of dubstep and what you were doing in the diaspora of UK dance music,
what was the Leeds scene like and how did you feel that influenced what you
were doing?
Ben UFO 
I mean the Leeds scene was tiny, the way that it started was in back rooms of bigger
raves, a place called the West Indian Center, which was sort of a big culture
center in Chapeltown. And you’d have either bigger drum & bass acts or dub
reggae soundsystems in the main room, dubstep in the back room. And most
importantly, both sound systems, in the main room and in the second room,
would be absolutely amazing so you could be confident that you could go and
see this music that was produced in a hyper specific way and really feel it
the way that it was designed to be felt. From that perspective it was a really
great place to go out and listen to the music, but the core community of
listeners and fans wasn’t quite there till slightly later. I think the fact
that the music was being played in sort of big dub reggae back rooms gave the
nights a slightly different feel as well. In London most of the places to
listen to this music would be sort of small basement clubs like Plastic
People, places like Mass, Third Base, which were all small capacity one-room
venues. So yeah, it definitely did have a different feel, and that’s probably
impacted on what we’ve done.
Lauren Martin 
And in terms of you DJing as well, like the dynamic with Hessle, you’re the
non-producer in the two, and you shouldn’t be embarrassed about that at all.
Once you started playing this music on the radio I always really liked... I
know you’re a fan of Billy, the DJ on 1Xtra, and he has this running phrase that
I really like, it’s like: He blocks out what people thinks is cool. Once dubstep
started to get cool, as it were, and you were DJing the Hessle records out, how did
you feel the relationship changed as a DJ between the radio and the club at
this point?
Ben UFO 
For me radio was always the way I accessed this music first and foremost so it was always kind of a solitary thing, I suppose. I didn’t start to play out until considerably later,
probably around 2006, ‘7 and the places that I was playing were tiny spots for
friends. There was a place in London that I think David talked about in his
lecture a few years ago called The Red Star in Camberwell, which was a sort of
small community event in Camberwell which happened Thursday evenings and it
would basically be like friends DJing for each other. So those were my initial
experiences of DJing. When the label started to pick up and we started to get
busier that was then something I had to come to terms with I guess. Like, I had to
figure out what it actually was that I wanted to present to people. Like you
said, I’m the only one of the three that doesn’t produce. DJing in and of
itself is quite a sort of niche, specific thing so it seems like a strange thing
to specialize in. But I do seem to be able to endlessly pick over what I do
and sort of own overanalyze it constantly. That’s still something I do too
much, I think.
Lauren Martin 
I think it works for your benefit. Speaking of the other elements of the trio,
do you think we could play a track from Ramadanman?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, sure. We picked a tune called “Don’t Change For Me,” didn’t we? This
came out in 2010, 2011.
(music: Ramadanman – “Don’t Change For Me”)
[applause]
Lauren Martin 
So, that was probably about three years into label, so that’s 2010. A lot of
what gets talked about in UK dance music is the idea of it being a continuum.
That one genre leads directly into another in some kind of historical lineage,
and things have a domino effect. And I think what’s really interesting about a
track like that is that I feel that could’ve been made this year or next quite
easily. I mean, I’m not a producer but I think there’s nodding faces in the
room. It seems to be a really interesting melting down of all these ghosts of
UK classic, now-classic, UK electronic music genres in a way that still quite
pertinent without sounding too retro. That’s my take on it anyway. What I find
interesting about it in turn is how you manage to frame these tracks in such a
way that it was speaking to what was happening at the time, but like the DJ
Billy idea of trying to block out what’s cool. I’m curious about what you
think about this idea of UK dance music and your place within it, being part
of a lineage of something.
Ben UFO 
Like, both of the tracks that we’ve played so far have been quite explicitly
backward looking, I think. Even if they sound contemporary... Like the TRG tune
was really explicitly referencing 2-step tracks and records by people like
Horsepower, Artwork, and El-B. David’s tune is obviously completely enthralled
to sort of classic jungle records, use of the breakbeat, the kind of constant
little references to different periods of UK dance music, like you said. We’ve
never wanted to release anything that is wholly nostalgic for something else,
so I hope that both of those records sound like a slightly more modern spin on
those two things. I mean, they’re both getting on a bit now, both of those
first two tracks, but hopefully they don’t sound fully retro, if that makes
sense. All of us are really interested in the history of UK music so I think
that it does have a really big impact on the music that we release. Like you
said, there’s this idea of the hardcore continuum, tracing through UK music
from the late ’80s to now, through acid house, all of the various brands of
garage, jungle, up to dubstep and grime. The lines are little bit more blurred
now, it’s slightly less clear what’s going on, and I think that’s actually
reflected in the music that we are releasing at the moment. The music we’re
releasing now I don’t think is as explicitly backward looking. I don’t exactly
know where it fits in, but that’s something that I’m quite interested in; I
quite like the idea of releasing music that’s slightly alien, that no one can
quite place, but that still fits within existing dance music conventions. I
think the value in looking at an idea like the hardcore continuum is that it
gives you an idea of what kinds of conventions of the dancefloor might be
worth holding onto, and it might also give you an idea of how it might be fun
to subvert them, if that’s something that interests you.
Lauren Martin 
It does interest us, that’s why were talking about it. When you are talking
about what you would like to hold on to and what you would like to
subvert, as a DJ, what would you like to do in those regards? What do you
think is possible to do?
Ben UFO 
It’s definitely not a thing that everyone is fully interested in doing because
there is so much music that fits very, very comfortably within existing
parameters of genre and stuff like that. I’m not particularly interested in
playing sets or releasing music that does fall really comfortably within those
parameters, and I think it comes from our perspective as kind of outsiders to the
various scenes that we’ve been involved with. Like you said, being in Leeds
when dubstep was going on, coming into DJing house and techno with a
background that’s more garage and dubstep and blah, blah, blah. So I think
we’ve always felt the freedom to play around with whatever genres we might be
interested in at the time. I don’t think we’ve really felt the pressure to live
up to the expectations of genre because we’ve never been welcomed into any.
Yeah, I hope that answers the question.
Lauren Martin 
No, no, it’s a difficult idea. I think I should have prefaced that a little
bit better; when I say this idea of a hardcore continuum I think one of the
preconceptions of it now is that UK dance music lives in a bubble and that it
only feeds into and off itself. When actually it was born of US house and
techno music, and essentially, if I can boil down quite a complicated idea, is
how the UK music diaspora managed to involve themselves in it. I quite like
that idea of you challenging is how you manage to fold in the traditions of US
house and techno with things like garage and grime and even bassline kind of
stuff, like the latter kind of things. Within that idea of what you’d like to
subvert and what you’d like to change, when it comes to playing music on the
radio and playing music on the dancefloor do you think there is a disparity
between the two?
Ben UFO
Possibly. I guess to go back to what you were saying about the hardcore
continuum; I think these ideas are super useful in that they do allow you to
draw a line through eras and pick out patterns and things like that. But with
ideas like that that are essentially really broad generalizations,
generalizations that are made because they are useful but they are still
generalizations, so there are still tons of exceptions to these ideas and tons
of tiny little flaws within the idea. And I find those flaws quite
interesting, so if you broadly sum up US house and techno in a certain way I’m
quite interested in finding people that don’t comfortably fit within those
parameters. And trying to figure out why it is that they’ve managed to make
it work despite the fact that they are operating at a tangent, in a way, from
things that they should be doing. I’m always interested in finding UK
producers that seem to pull in their influences from the States or for
somewhere else, because like you said, there is this idea that somehow UK
music exists in a bubble and UK producers only look to other UK producers for
their inspiration and their ideas. And we know that’s not true, I mean when we listen
to garage records you can pick out tons of ideas from US rap and R&B and
all that kind of stuff. But for the simplicity of the idea of this continuum
it makes sense just to kind of lock it into place. So yeah, I think that does
inform my ideas about what I’d like to do as a DJ and what I’d quite like to
do with the label. I’m quite interested in trying to be one of those people
that can find slightly different ways of doing things and that can subvert the
kind of established narratives around the music that we’re involved with.
Lauren Martin
I think another thing that’s really interesting about that, when you say
trying to pull in a bank of knowledge as a DJ, I think one of the interesting
things with this idea of a continuum is the idea of being eclectic and
what that means is a DJ. And I don’t know what other people think of this but
I think it’s quite strange how the word “eclectic” as a DJ automatically
assumes you’re educated about music. That you have a wealth of knowledge about
various things and that implies you’re inherently good at what you do. And I
think as a DJ this is quite an interesting dichotomy, because when people say
“eclectic” you can see eclectic as knowledgeable, but a DJ in the student union
bar can be eclectic, it doesn’t imply quality. And I wonder what you think
about the relationship between eclecticism and specializing.
Ben UFO 
So again, it’s quite complicated, I think we were having a conversation about
this yesterday. I think for emerging scenes that have a newness about them
that are kind of unique and fresh and vital in that way that dubstep was, in
that way that grime was, in that way that 2-step garage was, specialism is
really really important because it’s that specialism that allows the music to
unravel and develop. So with a genre like dubstep there was DJs Hatcha and
Youngsta who both produced occasional records but were essentially specialist
DJs. And they kind of put a lot of initially quite disparate music into
context as being one thing, and it was that that really sort of honed the
sound and made it what it was. And it helped people identify with it, I think.
It made the music less impenetrable or something. I don’t think that I’m that
kind of DJ at all, because like I said, I’ve never really been an insider to
those kinds of scene workings, but I really admire DJs that do that. Talking
about specialism and eclecticism, I think a lot of the time, like you said,
that narrative is a massive oversimplification. DJs like Hatcha and Youngsta,
they might have done something really hyperspecific but they obviously have a
wealth of knowledge to draw on and it’s that that underlies their specialism.
So I don’t think anyone should be afraid to really go in on what they’re doing
and really hone it and perfect it because there is obviously an enormous
amount of value in that, that just kind of wild eclecticism and picking and
choosing from a million different areas aimlessly... That’s a completely false
binary, but there’s value in both specialism and eclecticism, basically.
Lauren Martin 
Speaking of Hatcha and Youngsta, we’ve got a wee bit from a Youngsta set that
you found especially inspiring. I’m just going to play a short blend so that
people who aren’t familiar with the style of dubstep DJing when Youngsta was
basically the god. So yeah, we’re going to play a bit of that. What kind of
time period was this one from?
Ben UFO 
This was 2005, when I was 19. I don’t know if people are familiar with pirate
radio conventional stuff, but there’s MC hosting on this set which… Yeah,
you’ll see what it sounds like. There’s a couple of blends in there... You’ll
hear the sort of sound of the FM broadcast... Yeah, it is quite evocative of
London at the time, I think. Oh, and it’s from a Rinse FM, which is the
station that I DJ on as well.
(music: excerpt Youngsta radio show on Rinse FM)
Lauren Martin
A round of applause for Youngsta, I guess, yeah.
[applause]
Now, may seem a little bit strange to play a segment of a DJ set in a talk
about a DJ that is not the recording, but I think it’s interesting to listen to
a set like Youngsta and try and understand what you mean by a specialist DJ,
in the sense that he didn’t actually play that many tracks there but he did a
lot with it. Which I think is what you mean by specialism as a DJ, right?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, in a sense. I think with Youngsta it was always more about pacing and
maintaining a certain atmosphere and vibe. He really did take a specialism to
sort of extremes like in those days he was only playing music by four or
possibly five producers across two-hour sets. And that was all he was
interested in. I think he would really criticize people that would come in and
give him music as well and when eventually he did expand the pool of producers
whose music he was playing, you could really hear that he’d spent a lot of
time grooming them, and speaking to each one of them. So he was very much
involved in the music that was being made, people were making music for him
and he was presenting it in his specific way. He is definitely a DJ that had a
massive community of listeners around him as well. It was quite inward-looking
thing, but it was all the better for that.
Lauren Martin 
And what about that kind of relationship between the listeners and the fans
and the producers with a DJ like Youngsta chimes with you and what you’ve been
doing with Hessle, for example, and your radio shows?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, absolutely. We’ve been doing radio for seven years now... Yeah, pretty
much seven years solid, on two separate stations. Initially on Sub FM which
was an Internet-based dubstep and garage and assorted UK music station, now on Rinse, which was pirate for 16 years and has had a community license in
East London for the last three or four. Yeah, it’s probably the single most
valuable thing, I think, in terms of me building up a career as a DJ and
someone that plays in clubs. The radio shows absolutely do inform what I do in
clubs because, I think that’s... It feels surprising to me but I think it should
have been it obvious all along, like, when you’re playing in clubs week in
week out you’re playing to very different crowds in very different places and
it can I think confuse, and it can make you question, I think, what it is that
you’re looking for in the music that you’re playing to people. The responses
can be so wildly different that I think it can make you question your own
responses to music a little bit. With the radio I’m playing to the same crowd
of listeners, more or less, every week. There’s obviously people driving
around London listening to the show who don’t write in and stuff and that’s
like a thing that I really like about playing on Rinse. But I really like the
fact, as well, that the same people write in to the show week in week out,
listening to the music that I’m playing, telling me what they think of it,
telling me what they like, occasionally what they don’t like. But yeah, it
kind of roots what I’m doing, I think it gives me a grounding that I wouldn’t
have otherwise. I think if I was just floating around clubs every week playing
this music to people I would probably feel a bit lost, to be honest.
Lauren Martin 
Yeah, feeling lost and having roots and all those kind words, it really hits
home how a specialist DJ with a core group of listeners and a fanbase for
clubbing, the kind of people who would follow you around as a DJ as opposed to
a producer, it kind of gives electronic music a home, quite literally. And
that specialism about having somewhere to have the music that you play live is
really interesting. I was actually wondering, on a slight tangent to that as
well, if we could play a little bit of something off of your Fabric Live mix
CD? And also explain a little bit about how that came around, and the
residency.
Ben UFO 
Yeah, as a label we have a residency at the club fabric in London, which has
just celebrated 15 years of being open. They’re another massive institution
that somehow inexplicably decided to give us a slot really, really early on
and have kind of built us up over the past few years. As the label has grown
they’ve given us slightly more prominent slots at the club, we now take over
the main room three times a year, and for the past two – well, we’ve done one of these
and we will be doing very soon – takeovers of the entire building which are
always really, really fun. Their CD series is, I think probably one of the few
remaining relatively successful mix CD series. One of the few that hasn’t
decided just to go with Internet podcasts. I’m not really sure what the
significance of that is, but for me, at least, it was an opportunity to spent a
really, really long time trying to hone something, trying to craft something,
I guess. The clip that I’m playing is hopefully representative of the kind of
thing that I really like hearing, and that I try and do. The three tracks are from
relatively different areas and sonically they’re quite disparate as well, but I
think they work really beautifully together. I’m not really sure what it is
about the three tunes that work so well together but I think played together
they have something that individually they don’t. 
(music: excerpt from Ben UFO Fabric Live mix)
Lauren Martin 
You can actually clap for Ben UFO for that one because he did mix that one.
[applause]
I think that’s the most meditative I’ve seen the room to date so that’s good.
It’s a fantastic mix, we’re in danger of listening to half the thing at
that point. But what I find really interesting about the idea of being a DJ’s
DJ and you not producing as part of Hessle, but you are representing much more
than just your skill by having a label and by being so invested; with the mix
series like Fabric Live, most people who do it are producers who also happen
to be DJs so it’s a way to promote their own music as well, as well as show
off their skill. When you don’t have your own music in there, what do you
consider is your work when you’re doing a mix like that?
Ben UFO 
I guess just kind of the full package. Like I said, doing a mix CD is an
opportunity for a DJ to spend some time honing something and crafting it, away
from any of the pressures that might come from generally playing to an
audience, which I think just naturally results in you making a different
thing. I think the way that I’ve approached recording podcasts and CDs like
this is probably much closer to me getting towards the kind of specialism that
we were talking about before than I have done on the radio and in clubs. I
think, again, it’s because it’s an opportunity to try and really look closely
at something and try and achieve a particular feel. Hopefully you agree that
those particular tunes work really well together and lend each other something
that they wouldn’t have otherwise. I think that’s always what I’ve been
interested in about DJing, is how certain DJs can make you feel very particular
things that you might not have felt before about certain tunes that you might
be familiar with already. DJs like Youngsta definitely did that to me, and DJs
like Optimo or DJs that sum up the positive eclecticism that we were talking
about before do that to me as well. That’s a slightly more achievable
aspiration for me, I think, to aspire to what someone like Optimo or... I’m
trying to think of other examples at the moment but they’re not coming to me.
Lauren Martin 
Actually, for the sake of context could you explain a little bit about Optimo
and why you like them so much and what they mean to you?
Ben UFO 
Sure, they are two DJs from Glasgow, Keith and Johnny. Been going for
a long time, put out a series of absolutely unbelievable mix CDs, that was
my first introduction to them. CDs which are quite often themed around a
certain sound but are sonically super disparate. They find ways of putting
together loads and loads of different kinds of music under similar stylistic
banners, somehow, and it is purely in the way that they do it; their skill as
DJs, that’s what makes it achievable for them. That’s something that I
really admire.
Lauren Martin 
So in the sense of the Fabric Live mix CD being an example of your work it
also is about putting yourself out there without your own music to back it up,
as it were. But what is interesting is when a producer and a DJ together has a
mythological kind of feel to them. There’s this is very innate combination of
factors that make somebody really special. And I know that somebody that
really represents that for you is a man called Spencer Kinsey. I think it
would be really good to have a little bit of the background about why that
particular DJ means a lot to you.
Ben UFO 
I think I brought him up in conversation when I have done interviews a few
times because he really represents what I was talking about before in terms of
someone who managed to live within a scene in a certain context whilst also
picking apart the established conventions of that scene. He’s actually someone
that was really crucial and actually quite reassuring for me as someone that was
getting into DJing house and techno. His style of mixing and the sort of
adventurousness of his production as well, but mostly his style of mixing gave
me reassurance that you could play house and techno with energy; that I could
mix records together in a way that came naturally to me, like in a kind of UK
style; quickly, with sort of, I don’t know, hands-on feel to the mixer. He
means a lot to me for that reason, I guess. There’s one particular mix of his,
actually, that made me feel as though I could actually contribute to something
something to house and techno just by DJing.
Lauren Martin 
And that’s quite a lot for one mix to do.
Ben UFO 
Yeah, I mean it’s a long mix, but yeah.
Lauren Martin 
Shall we hear a bit of that mix so people get a sense of what you mean?
Ben UFO 
Sure, I mean it’s a completely different thing to anything that I’ve played so
far. It’s a really bad recording as well, it’s really saturated and, yeah, it
sounds like there’s some really weird kind of tape compression stuff going on.
And the mixing is not even particularly tight, as well, but as someone from the
UK that was interested in garage and dubstep that’s not really been something
that’s ever bothered me particularly. Check it out.
(music: excerpt Spencer Kinsey DJ mix)
Lauren Martin 
I love that.
[applause]
Just before you say anything, one thing that’s really struck me, apart from
your Fabric Live mix, which I have heard, I hadn’t heard those two mixes
before enough to remember how they run anyway. And what’s really struck me
about playing all three of them in a sequence is that Youngsta’s was for
radio, yours was recorded and released, and that was very much like the
club recording. I think what all three managed to speak to is that there are
different homes for electronic music. There’s no set, I don’t know what you
think of this maybe this could be a segue into this, but when people say this
is dance music that you can listen to at home, dance music for the club, dance
music for the radio, I think bracketing these off, as a listener, isn’t very
helpful and it probably isn’t very helpful for you as a DJ. I don’t know what
you think about that and in what kind of context you think your work is most
applicable to, if that makes sense?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, I’m not sure I completely agree. I think boundaries are useful and kind
of essential. I mean I definitely agree in part that things like music having very,
very specific purposes is sort of... I’d never describe a track that I play as
purely a club track or purely a radio track, so in that sense I agree with
you. But also, music is contextual, and certain music is designed for
certain contexts, certain music functions particularly well in certain
contexts. I think it would be a slightly odd as a DJ playing music for people
if you didn’t take that into account. When I play really big parties I
definitely approach them differently to the thing I did last night with Nobu,
which was absolutely tiny. In a context like that where you’ve got people
staring right at you, right with you, I think that music is so much more
tangible in that kind of context. It’s so much more immediate and you can get
away with so much more. On a big stage where, particularly if you’re DJing and not
sticking your hand in the air and stuff, what you’re actually doing up there
isn’t particularly visually obvious, a lot more gets lost, and I think it would
be weird not to take that into account. That’s one side of it, the other side
of it is that those kinds of dynamics have led to there being quite established
ways of performing from space to space. There are certain sort of tropes and
conventions that you hear again and again if you go big room raving. Because
there is certain stuff that will trigger thousands of people to put their
hands in air and stuff. That kind of thing isn’t particularly something that
I’m interested in. I obviously do play into that a little bit because there is
something really nice about performing to a lot of people that are sort of
simultaneously showing you that they’re having a good time. But I’m quite
interested in trying to achieve that sense of unity in a big space by
doing something a little bit different and trying to work around those
conventions a bit as well. That’s why I continue to play in both kinds of
space. It’s not that one thing informs the other, because playing in big rooms
doesn’t inform playing in small spaces at all, but continuing to play in small
spaces and being inside of the crowd as much as possible, that is something
that I think will stay really, really important to what I do. It gives you an idea of
how something slightly more specialist might translate when you try and do it
to more people.
Lauren Martin 
Yeah, and it’s also interesting when you consider how the world of clubbing,
and the fact that you even use the phrase “the world of clubbing” is probably
quite indicative of what I’m about to say, is that in the past five, six,
seven years clubbing has become a recreational thing to do. It’s like eating
or exercising, people go clubbing on the weekends whether they particularly
like music or not. It’s become a hobby that’s very accepted. Whereas once
clubbing was a mix of escapism, a political, sexual, radical space to
experience something out with your norm. Now that clubbing is part of millions of
peoples’ norms, it is a billion-dollar industry, there are entire islands
devoted to the activity pretty much. I’m wondering: You, styled as an
underground DJ as it were, you are now presented with all of these different
spaces to play with in what is now a billion-dollar industry; how do you see
how you’ve played over the last five years in tandem with this enormous growth
of what is now clubbing culture?
Ben UFO 
It’s difficult to pick my own experience and my own trajectory apart from
general trends and stuff like that, but I do think that underground music in
particular has been really successfully monetized, basically, and it seems
like a much bigger industry to me than it was. And I don’t know if that’s
partly to do with me playing different music and finding myself involved with
scenes that are more established and have more established means of promoting
itself and stuff like that. But I don’t think that’s the whole of it. I mean the
festival circuit is a really, really good example of something that’s
absolutely just gone completely crazy recently. There is absolutely enormous
amounts of money involved in some these bigger organizations as well. I don’t
know if that impacts on the way that I approach DJing. It does mean that I’ve
found myself playing in spaces to a lot of people, the majority of whom don’t
know who I am, so I guess that does have an impact on the way I play and the
way I DJ. But equally, it’s something that sort of gives me even more of a
reason to try and play some of the weirder stuff as well, because it’s a
platform to do that. And I do enjoy working around whatever problem I’m faced
with, whether it’s playing bizarre techno records to 2000 people or something,
it’s a fun challenge. It’s really fun thinking of ways to try and get away
with doing that.
Lauren Martin 
Definitely. And then in turn you must have tried to present music in settings
that are not conventional dancefloor spaces. It’s quite interesting how this
kind of circuit means that you are regularly gigging around the world at a
time when, for example, the Youngsta’s of dubstep, just at FWD>> or DMZ
and then Spencer Kinsey would’ve been in a very particular time and place,
you’re playing very underground music across the world. Are there any
particular examples recently where you’ve felt it has and hasn’t worked your
benefit?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, I mean I’m sure, I’ve had my share of bad gigs as have most DJs. There
was one particularly memorable festival set when I wasn’t particularly
experienced with them. I’d been on a stage closing after three or four French
hip-hop acts... Yeah, a lot of people, about 3000 people, I’ve never seen that
amount of people before in my life. I’ve always said I’ve never seen, before
or since, as many people walk away from me as quickly. [laughs] It was really awful. I
mean two or 300 people stuck around, but that’s like 2500 people leaving all at
once, it’s quite a lot.
Lauren Martin 
It’s a bit of a knock.
Ben UFO 
Yeah, yeah. Totally. But it’s an experience, I think, like I sort of overcame
that hurdle eventually. I don’t know, I think traveling, playing in different
contexts, it does have a really big impact on the way that you experience the
music that you play. I think that was something that affected the trajectory
of dubstep and how it developed, the problems that it faced, translating
itself to bigger spaces from those small rooms. Yeah, that essentially was the
thing that eventually killed my interest in it. Because the things that I had
to do or the things that it ended up doing, it became a completely different thing.
Yeah, I’m not sure what I’m getting at particularly.
Lauren Martin 
It’s all right.
Ben UFO 
We were talking about how this music has been sort of monetized really
effectively and how there are more massive spaces than ever with which to
perform and show your music to people. I think seeing what happened with
dubstep, seeing what happened with drum & bass before it, it’s given me a
really good idea of what I would like to avoid. And that really informs how we
approach the music that we release on Hessle. We want to release music that
functions in big spaces but that still manages to have something different,
something alien about it. So music that is linked to, I guess, sort of big
room dancefloor tropes and stuff but that somehow skirts around it. That
manages to kind of work effectively and engage people, but to do it in a
slightly different way. And it’s really satisfying when you see a lot of
people react in shock to something that they weren’t expecting, I think you
end up getting some really interesting moments that way. People start
interacting with each other differently, it’s really nice when you see
that happen. And the last record that we released is I think the best example
of that. I’m really happy with it, it’s the first record that we’ve released
in a year, and I think one of the reasons it took us so long is that we’ve been
trying really hard to think of ways to approach this kind of problem. Making
weird music accessible to lots of people.
Lauren Martin 
Well have you got an example of it we could play?
Ben UFO 
The last record we released is by a guy called Bruce, we’ve picked a lot of
producers that have really straightforward names. 
[laughter]
Yeah. His real name is Larry, actually.
[laughter]
Lauren Martin 
I just assumed he was called Bruce, but you know…
Ben UFO 
I don’t think it’s public knowledge. It is now. So this is “Not Stochastic” off
Hessle #27. Yeah, see what you think.
(music: Bruce – “Not Stochastic”)
[applause]
Lauren Martin
And you were speaking about surprises on the dancefloor, that actually did
stop me in my tracks, so I guess it served its purpose. What’s really
interesting about that track is that we’ve kind of actually managed to
bookmark this really nicely because we started with Hessle, we had a little
bit more Hessle, and then we’re finishing with the future of Hessle. When we’re
talking about dance music presented in all these different contexts, the
radio, that club, the official mix CD release, you’re having to play in all
these different clubs all over the world, big festival stages, it seems like
an endless list of what could and could not work. What is it with that track in
particular and what you’d like to do with Hessle going forward that you feel
can speak to these different situations and put across your ideas of what you
would like to do as a DJ?
Ben UFO 
Again, like I said, I guess this tune is something that messes around with
established big-room techno tropes. It involves white-noise drops and all
these kinds of things that everyone would’ve heard a million times, but
structurally it’s all over the place. It’s really bizarre, it’s been put
together in a really specifically and purposefully awkward way. Awkward
particularly from a DJing perspective, which is something that I’m kind of up
for. But yeah, I think it really works, it definitely stops people in their
tracks, like you said. This is the kind of thing that I’m interested in
releasing on the label, it’s not that we’re being awkward for the sake of it
or that we’re taken ourselves away from established dancefloor tropes, that’s
not what I want to do it all. With the label and with my DJing, too, I want to
work within these conventions because they’re there for a reason. They work
and dance music needs to function in a space. But the label for me has always
been informed by our perspective initially as being outsiders. And I still
feel that way now and I feel like that’s why we continued to be interested in
releasing these records that come from a kind of a kind of outsider
perspective. And yeah, that fully informs my DJing.
Lauren Martin 
I think [looks at desk] that’s gone on for an hour and a half. I would like to ask if anybody
has any questions for Ben. Oh good, oh wow, amazing. Lots of people wanting to
ask questions. Can we just give a hand for Ben speaking so nicely for us?
Great.
[applause]
Audience Member 
Last night was amazing, and I’m a DJ too, and listening to the third mixtape,
for me is like overwhelming when I hear a DJ that I really, really like. And
you said that that made you want to put something there that made you trust
that you could add something to a techno scene or whatever. And for me
listening to that kind of mixtape just makes me feel the opposite way because
what can I add listening to so many good DJs around and trying not to... Because I think I have found a path in two ways, trying to see why I like them and trying to copy some vibe. Or just doing the opposite because, I mean, my question is, how have you found that thing you are trusting that you can do for adding your place in that scene?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, it’s a good question. And I definitely sympathize, because back in the day
when I was listening to dubstep DJs and jungle DJs I very much did feel that like,
“Why would I bother thinking that I could put myself out there when there’s
all these guys doing what they do so well?” But I think for me what was
different about the Spencer Kinsey mix, which I actually played the wrong clip
from, I’d found a really good clip that involved loads of spin backs and UK
sounds and stuff but I played the wrong one, but it was my lack of familiarity
with the scene at that point that made me feel as though I could contribute
something to it. If I’d known more about house and techno, more about the
history of the music, I might have felt more cautious, it probably would’ve
felt more difficult to approach, just because, like you said, I might have felt
more overwhelmed by the amount of stuff that was already there. But at the
time I hadn’t heard anyone really mix like him. He’s not active at the moment,
hopefully I’m not kind of wholesale ripping him off, but I think being
influenced by somebody’s approach, if you don’t hear anyone else with that
approach out there at the time, is kind of fine. I guess also something that would probably be
more reassuring, I guess, is that I think the longer you do what you do, as long as
you’re self-critical and stuff, you just inevitably do just end up progressing in a
slightly different direction to most of the people that initially influenced
you. I think that can’t help but happen. I think that’s what happened with me
anyway, I don’t think you should let it put you off. I’m glad there are some
DJs in the audience, I was wondering.
Audience Member 
Thank you.
Lauren Martin 
Yeah, just pass it along I guess, yeah.
Audience Member 
Hello, I had a question that has not been discussed actually today. I’m talking to you
as a label owner which releases vinyl, and I have question about the medium
that you share your music with. I’m sure you also own quite a few records of
yours. So what was the reason back when you created Hessle Audio for this
medium, which is vinyl, and what is the reason now to continue doing it?
Ben UFO 
I think there’s a few different reasons for that. For me, I find the amount of
digital music that’s released now completely overwhelming to the point where
if I go on to a digital store and click releases from this week I can’t get
through the first page. I’ve barely got through the first half of the As
before I stop. So from that perspective I think it’s just a filter, which
everyone needs; there’s so much music out there that everyone needs filters. And
those filters can be DJs and record labels and stuff as well, but it can also
be your choice of format. I don’t limit myself to just buying vinyl, but I do
find that it’s released in manageable quantities so that I can actually check
out everything that comes out. We started the label as a vinyl label for
different reasons though; it was literally just because everyone else was
doing it. We were fans of a certain scene and that was how that scene did it
so that’s how we wanted to do it as well. Most of the DJs that we were going
to see were playing on vinyl and dubplate at the time and we wanted to be able
give them our records so that they could listen to them and maybe play them.
That was the reason for that. I think we continue to do it just because it’s
nice to have an artifact, it’s nice to have a physical reminder of what you’ve
done.
Audience Member 
Thank you, totally agree.
Ben UFO 
It’s not format purism at all, I’m not interested in that. It’s just from a
personal perspective we like having records, they’re tangible.
Lauren Martin 
Anyone else? [points] At the end?
Audience Member 
Hello, you’ve kind of touched on this a little bit with bridging the
marketplace or the musical climate with alien music, you know what I mean? How
you are trying to spread it. As a person who, I guess, is responsible for
spreading music as a label and as a DJ, in the reverse question, do you ever
have any conscious dilemmas or make conscious efforts to limit that spread or
try and preserve the trajectory of a niche movement that you love or champion?
Ben UFO 
Yeah, definitely. It’s something that I’m more conscious of now than I was at
this time last year, definitely. There was this whole debacle around outsider
house as a thing, which…
Lauren Martin 
I actually made a point of not bringing that up, so you brought it up, so... [laughs]
Ben UFO 
Yeah, yeah, it’s my own fault. So I guess over the past 18 months or something
there’s been a whole wave of really interesting producers that are making
house and techno that broadly sounds quite lo-fi and that doesn’t play into a lot
of the dancefloor conventions  that have been established around house and
techno. The Hard Wax record shop [in Berlin] uses the word “outsider” to describe anything
that is slightly kind of other but still fits within that kind of genre
boundary, and I made a sort of crack on the radio being the stuff being outside
house. And someone wrote an article about it and ever since then that’s been
its name and that’s how it’s been described in the media. A lot of people are
doing it in a super tongue-in-cheek way, but it’s still something that I think
has generally had quite a negative impact on the music and a lot of people’s
production careers because they found themselves kind of pigeonholed into this
one specific style. That kind of pigeonholing is really convenient if you’re
trying to sell music, or if you’re trying to sell an idea, sell a night, sell
an event, but I think it’s not particularly helpful a lot of the time when for
the producers when they’re 17, 18, 19-years-old and just getting started. So in
that respect, yeah, I’ve definitely thought about whether for certain musics,
whether or not it’s appropriate to be playing into that kind of hype machine.
Audience Member 
Cool, thanks.
Audience Member 
Hi Ben, thank you for your inspiring work. I’ve got a question for producers,
actually. Speaking of awkward structures, I’m a producer and totally not a DJ,
so I often, when I compose my tracks, I like to build a peculiar and strange
narrative and still make club music somehow. The question is, when you meet a
track that has a really awkward structure, maybe BPM changes or no hints of
timing, you can imagine…
Ben UFO
It sounds difficult.
Audience Member 
Okay, yeah, that’s the question. If the track is good, you’re still playing
it?
Ben UFO 
Are you making your music for DJs to play? Is that the idea?
Audience Member 
Well, I’d like to.
Ben UFO 
I think you shouldn’t let it put you off making the music that you want to
make but it might be difficult. I think for me and people that share my
background we... Even though I play quite a few different styles of music most
of the music that I play comes from a particular scene. And those scenes are
defined by people working within quite specific structural guidelines and
stuff, I guess, particular time signatures, particular tempos. And there are
people who really successfully manage to kind of swerve those and still manage
to get their music played. But I think if you’re doing something that is sort
of really specifically yours, and that doesn’t have a kind of network of
producers and DJs and a scene around it, I think that kind of really intense structural
awkwardness might be a bit of a problem.
Audience Member 
Okay.
Ben UFO 
But I’m not sure, do you have DJs and producers around you? Like a circle of
people that you’re making music with?
Audience Member 
Yeah, yeah totally. And they actually play my music which is not that awkward
like I made you imagine right now. [laughs] I’m totally conscious of what
kind of guidelines, let’s say, genres are suggesting. So working around them
conceptually but interesting for me, I’m not a DJ, again. It’s like working
around rules so that’s inspiring. Okay, well, thank you for this.
Lauren Martin 
Is there anyone else? Are we all good? OK, great. Well, thank you so much for probably speaking for the longest on camera you’ve probably ever done, I really appreciate it.
Ben UFO 
By far, yeah.
Lauren Martin 
Yeah, by far. And thank you for just, all your work. So, Ben UFO everybody.
[applause]
