If you missed the anthems and refixes by Girl Unit, Egyptrixx, Mosca, and Bok Bok that have dropped on Night Slugs, you must have been sleeping. The label sprang from the eponymous club night started by Alex Sushon, AKA Bok Bok, and James Connolly, AKA L-Vis 1990, after they connected on MySpace. Bok Bok already had a solid grounding in soundsystem culture, and then, as the grime scene evolved, he moved toward raw, upbeat grooves from further afield: Baltimore breaks, Detroit ghettotech, the footwork/ghetto-house hybrids in Chi-town, and South African arch riddim constructions. With Night Slugs an integral part of London’s underground club scene, Bok Bok, as its head honcho, has carved out a distinct space for himself and his posse on the futuristic side of bass-heavy, hip-hop-leaning dancefloor-obliterators. 
In this talk at the 2013 Red Bull Music Academy, Bok Bok discusses his passion for the dancefloor and un-human music.
Emma Warren  
Good morning, everybody. I want to welcome our first guest of the day, DJ,
producer and co-founder of Night Slugs, Bok Bok.
[applause]
Bok Bok 
Hello.
Emma Warren  
So I guess the starting point for our conversation is something about clubs.
To what extent are nightclubs the source for most of what you and Night Slugs
do?
Bok Bok 
I would say it’s like the main context. It’s the place where our music’s meant to live, so it’s vital, actually. Yeah, it’s like the main focus. It’s only really recently that a few of the producers in Night Slugs have started to think outside of that context really, and there’s various causes for that. I guess part of it is just growing up as an artist and stuff like that. I’m
really keen to try and keep as much of the music in that context as possible,
because my whole thing is, Night Slugs is about the club. We’re about
trying to make that space much more dynamic and interesting and flexible and
much more of an experience than it’s actually traditionally set up to be. This
idea that the club is just a hedonistic place, it’s okay, but I think that it
could be so much more than that. Or it could be more than that while still being hedonistic and a fun place to go out and have a good time. But it’s
also, if you let it be, a place where you can have a genuine experience, then
I think it can become that.
Emma Warren  
So if you’re in the business of kind of redesigning the nightclub to be able
to do different things, for different things to be possible, what else would
be in there?
Bok Bok 
In the club? Well, sometimes the possibilities are kind of limited. I find
that frustrating, because a lot of the time I want clubs to be just how I want
them to be. I want them to be dark, I want them to be smoky. In fact, I want
it to be pitch black, which hardly ever happens.
Emma Warren  
The old exit light business.
Bok Bok 
Exit lights, the bar light, it’s health and safety. But all that stuff is
really frustrating to me, because I just want everyone to be able to be in
their own space and almost have this underwater kind of experience, almost
like this sensory deprivation feeling of being detached from normality and
therefore being able to experience something. I know Kode9 has talked about this as well and the way he talked about it kind of influenced me as well, you
know, clubs as being dark and that and allowing you to have a really unique
experience in them. 
But there’s other stuff too, like we did a warehouse rave
in New York a few months ago and it was our own production; we weren’t working
with anyone else, we promoted it ourselves. Me and L-Vis really made a point
to try and design the space, so we worked with the Thunder Horse guys to present the
space in a certain way. So we had these plants on the stage and a backdrop of
old, grey TV screens that weren’t switched on, that were just there for a
texture, I guess, and a smoke machine that was going really overboard, to a
point where at one point the lights in this warehouse came on and that was
kind of part of the thing, that when the lights came on you could still not
see anything because there was so much smoke in the room. And that’s kind of
what we want. But the opportunities where we do have the chance to control the club environment, we definitely try and seize those because it’s rare. It’s becoming more common for us to be able to do that and it’s
definitely something I want to try and focus on.
Emma Warren  
Smoke’s a funny thing. I remember when the smoking ban came into force in the
UK, and it was suddenly like someone was missing. It was like a person had left
the room.
Bok Bok 
Yeah, it was difficult for more reasons than one, but it was definitely
strange. But, you know, you can create smoke machines without people having to
smoke, so there’s an easy way to get ‘round that. I just wish people would
relax about health and safety and then we’ll have a better time in the club.
Emma Warren  
But for you, the club as a thing, it’s important in lots of different ways.
It’s important because that’s how you started, and I guess it’s important
because it’s a kind of ongoing test station for what you do.
Bok Bok 
Yeah, because I don’t want to do this thing, a lot of people’s careers take
this path where they start kind of here and then they have this aspirational
thing where they want to be somewhere else. I think that’s fine, but I always
want to keep one foot in the club, at least one foot, if not both. We’ll see
how it pans out, but the important thing is I want to stay rooted to what it
is I started doing. I’m trying to be a DJ, that’s what I want to be doing for
god knows how long after this. When I make music, that’s the context I’m
thinking of and this idea of ‘The Club’ with a capital C, it’s definitely
something that’s vital to me for sure.
Emma Warren  
So when you first started doing parties, was it because there was, like the classic reason to start a night, because you want to do something slightly different and there’s a group of you and you want to do something and then it takes on a life of its own, or was there a slightly different reason?
Bok Bok 
No, that was exactly it. It was me and L-Vis, we were bored with the
situations we were getting booked at as up-and-coming DJs. We didn’t feel that
we really had a context in London that much, because some of the stuff that
was going on at the time was cool, but we just didn’t fit. That was definitely
the motivation to start something new and try and cultivate it and we really
did that. We didn’t have any idea of where it would lead at all. We just
wanted to start a club night for fun, just like everyone else. I mean, how
many of you guys run club nights, it’s like everyone does it, right? We really
just started off from that, just being these DIY promoters doing raves in
South London in a venue that used to be a squat. Our sights weren’t set high.
Emma Warren  
But there is a lineage there, isn’t it? Because you had a club like
FWD>> and then you had DMZ starting because they wanted to do something slightly from FWD>>, that was their thing with
more shades of colour in it. Then you, broadly coming through those
experiences, had the same feeling.
Bok Bok 
Totally. You guys know about FWD>>, does everyone know about
FWD>>? FWD>> was a club night in London and I bring it up – well, it’s a good thing you brought it up – I want explain a little bit because it’s totally vital, influential to what we’re doing now, I feel. FWD>> was
in a club called Plastic People,
which has changed a little bit now, but at the time it was like this tiny box
club in Shoreditch. The size of the soundsystem and the way the soundsystem
sounded and felt and the way that it was set up was way beyond the size of the
room, but for some reason it just worked amazingly. That was like the ultimate
feeling of what I’m describing, the underwater club experience. You go there
and the lights are off and you can completely have your own space, because it
was never that busy, or most nights it wasn’t that busy. The music was, when I
started going, predominantly this thing that was being called dark garage,
8-bar, which then soon became dubstep, but people would always go there and
play different disciplines of the same thing. So you could see four DJs on one
FWD>> line-up, and they would each be bringing their own slant on this
kind of sound that was bass heavy, and a really physical experience because of
this crazy soundsystem. People would go there and test tracks, dubplates would
get cut just so they could be played in this club. It was kind of
specil, and it was definitely a community. I wasn’t really even part of [it]. I
was just going to the nights because that was somewhere I was getting a lot of
inspiration from at the time. And I stayed going there, definitely had some of
my most influential club experiences in this tiny box room. So yeah,
FWD>> was like a template.
Emma Warren  
But by being there you kind of were part of it because...
Bok Bok 
Yeah, you could say that. I became part of it slowly, but the difference is I
wasn’t running up to the DJs trying to give them tracks, or I wasn’t running
up to the DJs trying to befriend myself or anything like that. I just wanted
to go there, listen, smoke and leave, basically.
Emma Warren  
But there’s another interesting thing about that. Obviously, I think it influenced a lot of people and a lot of people who were there went off to do things.
Bok Bok 
Definitely.
Emma Warren  
It sort of enabled people to do things.
Bok Bok 
I think it was the foundation for so many, because people like myself and DJs
like Ben UFO and DJs like Oneman, we all started around the same kind of time, so this new wave of London people who came after the initial FWD>>, Rinse, DMZ people. We felt like we were definitely following in their footsteps to some extent, so it definitely set a precedent.
Emma Warren  
There’s something about the infrastructure, but also about the message that you can do stuff, you can invent something.
Bok Bok 
For sure.
Emma Warren  
And that all the relevant bits were in place for you to be able to do that.
That also had an impact, didn’t it?
Bok Bok 
Definitely, but also I never felt like I couldn’t do something, or I couldn’t
try. I mean, as much as they helped, that also came from the feeling that you
can, why not?
Emma Warren  
So when you started your parties, can you give us a sense about how it goes
from being people wanting to do a party - because what you are doing and the
thing that you’re into doesn’t quite fit the things that already exist - to it
becoming a thing where people are giving you tunes and you’re thinking, “Well, this is the next logical step”? How did that come about?
Bok Bok 
To be honest, I’m not really sure how that came about. It was just so organic
and natural, where the people that are coming out to the nights are friends of
ours, and maybe they get inspired by something they hear or they get inspired
by a certain blend and then they go home and make something. Or just the fact
that they’re like-minded and we’ve been talking for years and we’ve been
sharing music and DJing together for years. It’s just a really, really natural
thing that came about. I can’t take credit for it. It’s just a beautiful
phenomenon that a bunch of people happened to start making the right kind of
music at the right time. And me and L-Vis just happened to be lucky enough to
be in a position to be playing that in different places and trying it out in
DJ sets and figuring out that, “Shit! It’s functional, it works, you can play
this in the club and people dance to it.” 
Really, that’s what led to the
foundation of the label. Also there was this frustration where we were
thinking about tracks by people like
Kingdom, people like Egyptrixx at time, because Girl Unit and Jam City weren’t really in it at that point so much, in the really early days. We were more looking at
people like Kingdom and Egyptrixx and thinking, “How come these club tracks
that are so effective, that are so functional and sound so good and we like
them so much, how come they’re not getting signed to other labels?” Me and L
were having lunch one day and I really remember, really clearly, being like,
“Hold on, ‘That Mystic’ by
Kingdom, that tune’s old as hell.” We were like, “Hold on a minute, why hasn’t
anyone done anything with that yet?” And we were like, “Well, maybe that
should be our first release.” Obviously, that didn’t happen in the end, but
it’s interesting that something like that was around for so long before we
even started the label, and it was definitely a catalyst, to think about it
just sitting there on the shelf and sitting there in our DJ crates, and how
unfair that is for everyone else.
Emma Warren  
So if you’re thinking about the early days of the label, I mean, obviously lots of people will know about all this but there’ll be some people who won’t. So who are the early parts of the family and what was it about their sound that pulled you towards them?
Bok Bok 
I have to say that Girl Unit, back when he was called Girl U No It’s True, was
completely foundation and he was definitely with us from the start and DJing
with us from the start and everything like that. My first real interaction
with him was when he submitted a mixtape for my – I used to run a blog, like a
webzine – that’s pretty retro to say that now, webzine. I used to do that with
someone you might know, Dan Hancox, we used to do that together. He’s a journalist in London. So anyway, Girl U No It’s True did a
mixtape for that blog and it was all Miami bass, booty kind of stuff. It’s not
far removed from what he’s doing now at all, actually, or what we’re doing now. I can’t even remember what year that was, but that was a long time ago. That was before the words Night Slugs were put together.
Emma Warren  
And that was a kind of a bassline inspiration, the “Slugs” part.
Bok Bok 
The name? Yeah, the name is a bassline thing. It’s like a London bassline
thing. Slugs means like ‘womp’ and the night is everything else, the ephemera.
That’s when it happens, at night. So, a pretty literal name, really.
Emma Warren  
We’re going to be playing lots of newer stuff as well, but is there something
you can play us from the early part of the label, just a little snippet to
give us a sense about where you’re coming from?
Bok Bok 
From the early days? Sure. I think this is still one of my favourite tracks
for the club ever. So this is “IRL” by Girl Unit, which I’m sure many of you
know.
(music: Girl Unit - “IRL”)
Bok Bok 
You know, I still remember when I first heard this and I just couldn’t believe
that my friend made this. My friend made this, it was crazy. It was like, “Is
this getting signed or what? Can I have this for the label, please?”
Emma Warren  
In the beginning part of the label there was a really distinctive sound. You had lots of different artists, but there seemed to be something that very much brought it all together.
Bok Bok 
Yeah, I think people plucked a few words from our early press releases that
really stuck. I’m not going to reiterate those now, because I’m trying to
shake all that off at this point.
Emma Warren  
That’s the reductive nature of the Internet, isn’t it?
Bok Bok 
It’s inevitable. But in my view, there was something that was connecting the releases that was a bit more intangible than that, that was more of a feeling, kind of an aesthetic approach to mixing and certain sound palette choices.
Emma Warren  
OK, let’s break that down a bit, because that’s interesting. That takes it
away from the reductiveness of what other people think.
Bok Bok 
Totally.
Emma Warren 
So what are those things that you say stylistically brought them together?
Bok Bok 
It’s even hard for me to pin it down, but a part of it has to do with the fact that I mix a lot of the records, so I look after the cohesion of things to some extent. I don’t do all of it, but I’ve done a lot of the records over the years, the actual engineering part. But I’d like to think that I’m not moving away from what the artists want. I’m trying to just build on their vision. I guess the whole listening to soundsystem music that was innovative, that
wasn’t like - nothing against reggae or anything like that - but that’s not
retro, that’s soundsystem music that’s trying to do something totally
different, but with the constraints of having these bass bins and these tops
and trying to fit into that template of sounding good in the club. I think
that’s the mentality of, like, “How will this push, or how will this feel?” To
some extent it was that. 
To another extent, of course, it was shared
interests, shared musical influences and all that kind of obvious stuff that
would make people get on, musically. So a shared interest in grime, a shared
interest in ghetto house and all these different other genres that were important to us. Other than that, I think it’s just trying to make people feel stuff in the club. Obviously, you want to make them bang but there’s something else there too, and I think that x-factor, that intangibleness is maybe what brings them together.
Emma Warren  
And are you aware, or not aware, but do you know what the feeling is that you want people to feel?
Bok Bok 
It varies between tracks, because some tracks want you to feel something and
other tracks want you to feel something [else].
Emma Warren  
Give me some examples, if you can or want to.
Bok Bok 
For example, with “IRL,” with Girl Unit’s music, it’s like again there’s a
variety. Even in his music it varies so much, it’s like one emotion in one
track and one emotion in another track. With “IRL,” when I heard it I was just
like, “This is horrible, this is horror. When this is going to be loud in the
club, this is going to be horrifying, but in a really cool way.” Just that sense of panic from his synths and the wooshing high frequencies, just profoundly uneasy.
Emma Warren  
I wonder what goes on with your heart and your blood pressure, it’s like
internal stuff.
Bok Bok 
That’s what I’m trying to say, it should be a physical experience.
Emma Warren 
You started the White Label imprint at
the same time. It seems now like a very clever thing to have done, to have had
it at the same time, sort of reflecting the output. What was the reason to
start it, really?
Bok Bok 
We just had bootlegs, basically. We had tracks that we didn’t feel comfortable
putting out properly, so limited, vinyl-only releases seemed like a nice, cheeky way to get around that. The first one was actually L-Vis’s record that he already released digitally on Sound Pellegrino, so
we were like, “Fuck it, why not?” So we just did a vinyl of it, small run, 500
copies or something. They sold right out. 
Then after that it started to be more about actual bootlegs, like creative ones, ones where we’d take an acappella that we definitely weren’t allowed to use and just put it over a beat that we’d made or something like that. And just clever edits, because the thing is, we make a lot of these for our own DJ sets. Kingdom does probably an edit a day like that and the rest of us like to do that kind of thing, too,
and it just makes our DJ sets so much more special. So, to some extent it was
the need to share some of that and to also allow other DJs to be able to have
access to some of that stuff.
Emma Warren  
But what’s it done for the whole thing, to have both those aspects running in
parallel?
Bok Bok 
It’s nice to have different outputs, because we’ve got Club Constructions now as well, so
it’s almost like there’s three strands to the label. Now that we have White Label and now that we have Club Constructions, it’s nice to be able to let the EPs be more monumental. Every time there’s going to be a new EP from now on, in the main Night Slugs series, it should feel like the next big statement of where we’re headed, like a big artistic statement. We really go in on the art and try to make it really dynamic. Whereas with the other ones, it’s like a
chance for us to keep feeding DJs and feeding the club hopefully, as long as
people want to play it. When I started getting into DJing it was
all about going into a record shop and seeing what was on the wall and then
maybe asking what was behind the counter, you know? It’s like cheeky white
label culture. I really miss it, because it’s a really special thing that felt
really special. When you’ve got something on white label that felt like it
wasn’t really widely available or widely known and you could play it in your
DJ sets, it was an amazing, awesome feeling. And to some extent, it’s trying to
preserve some of that culture that I feel like I come from as a DJ.
Emma Warren  
It’s the power of secrets really, isn’t it, aka unreleased dubs?
Bok Bok 
Kind of, yeah. It’s not quite dubplate culture, but something in the middle.
Emma Warren  
We could now talk a bit about how the label progressed into albums, or you’ve kind of reached a point where you’re talking about DJs and you as a DJ and the DJs that influenced you. I wonder which path should we take?
Bok Bok 
I don’t know.
Emma Warren  
[laughs] Well, let’s come back to the thought about the DJ then, because I
think that’s kind of next in where we’re going to come to, and maybe you can
just tell us a bit about the label and how you moved into the sort of transitional phase of putting out albums.
Bok Bok 
Sure, OK. The first time we put out an
album was because Egyptrixx made one for us. It’s like a lot of things with the label,
to some extent I’m trying to look after the whole thing, I’m trying to really
make it cohesive and make it feel good and make it feel like it’s all happening at the same time and everything like that. But a lot of it wasn’t actually planned, a lot of it happened really serendipitously because someone happened to make the right piece of music. So sure enough, Egyptrixx just made
an album and there it was, and it was great and it fit the sound of the label,
the aesthetic of the label, so much that we just couldn’t not do it. I never
actually set out to be like, “OK, we’ve graduated, we need to start doing
long-playing projects.” It wasn’t like that at all, Egyptrixx just happened to
make us a really wonderful album and that was our first album release. 
Then we also did Allstars Vol. 1, which kind of ended up sounding like an album but that wasn’t the intention at the time, but it’s a nice byproduct of that. The
intention with that was just to collate all our music and put it together and
make people listen to it kind of in a row, drive the point home that yes,
these tracks are cohesive.
Emma Warren  
And I guess also, maybe giving an in to people who aren’t so deep in it.
Bok Bok 
Totally. Doing a compilation really helps with that in the sense that people
who aren’t following it on the daily, weekly basis of what’s hot, what just
dropped or whatever. A lot of people got into stuff that way and because
tracks like “Wut “ by Girl Unit
were on it and things like that, it was a cool move for us because it helped
us expand. That’s not really an album, it’s kind of different to what you were
talking about. For example, obviously Jam City did an album with us called
Classical Curves, which is really special and still really means a lot to me and it
seems to have connected with a few people, people seem to like it. But the way
that came about is that we actually asked him to do that, because I would
always listen to his demos – and he always had a shitload of music that never
got released. He recently leaked some of it, which is cool. We’re really happy
that happened, because I feel like it deserves to be out there, because a lot
of it’s really, really good. But he always had an absolute ton of music that
he didn’t really want to put out – and the volume was too high for
us to even put out, really. But I would always find myself listening to it,
like in a playlist together, one after the other, and I always found that his
tracks sounded really good surrounded by other tracks by him. So that’s where
we came from with that, we actually asked him, commissioned him, to do an album
for us. Then we almost had that done and then it got completely scrapped, and
he just suddenly got this vision and just wrote from scratch and then Classical Curves happened.
Emma Warren  
So can we have a little listen to something, and maybe tell us...
Bok Bok 
Yeah, for sure.
Emma Warren  
Play something that when you first heard, you realised that something completely different had happened.
Bok Bok 
Totally.
(music: Jam City - “Her” / applause)
Emma Warren  
So what did you think when you received this?
Bok Bok 
I mean, that wasn’t what it sounded like when I received it, but it was in a
batch of tracks that made me go, “OK, this is his own project, basically. He’s
got his vision and he’s definitely got it worked out.”
Emma Warren  
We could carry on talking about Night Slugs for ages longer. I think probably we should come back at some point to talk about some of the newer people that are in the family, but I just wanted to take it back to you for a minute. You’ve said before, basically I’m a DJ, and it was DJs that influenced you
heavily in the first place. Can we bring things ‘round to a certain gentleman
by the name of Slimzee?
Bok Bok 
Totally. So Slimzee was the godfather of grime or is the godfather of grime,
whatever you want to say, but maybe a little bit less active now. He was most active around, I want to say like 2002, 2003 onwards, until he got his ASBO. An ASBO’s an Anti-social Behaviour Order, which stops you from doing certain things in the UK. It’s kind of a loophole in the law, which means you don’t get sent to prison, but you’re on parole, kind of. It restricts your movement. I think he’s got the only height-based
ASBO, where he can’t travel to a certain height, because that means he can’t
get to the pirate radio station.
Emma Warren  
He wasn’t allowed over, was it four floors or something?
Bok Bok 
He wasn’t allowed to go four floors above ground level or something crazy like
that.
[laughter]
Emma Warren  
Because he dedicated so much to the pirate radio world.
Bok Bok 
He is pirate radio, you know? I got into him through Dizzee Rascal, basically. I know that was the way into grime. For people that are into grime, I think a lot of people, it made it click for them when the Dizzee record came out, when the first Dizzee singles started coming out, “I Luv U,” and all that kind of stuff. 
Before that, I’d gone to school surrounded by garage and everyone was listening to garage, which was okay for me but it didn’t really click until I started hearing these really deformed kind of sounds. It’s like techno being made by kids that didn’t have a techno audience, or didn’t have any audience
for that matter, really.
Emma Warren  
And sometimes quite literally being made on a Playstation.
Bok Bok 
At times, although I think that’s been played up a little bit. But definitely
being made on cheap software, being made with cheap sounds, being made without
any real technical know-how. But that’s actually what made it special because
they found their own way through it. In fact, I’ve been trying to recapture
that naivety, I guess, and it’s impossible. Because the way they did things,
the not-knowing was exactly what made these producers make this crazy, brilliant music. That they didn’t have anyone to answer to, they didn’t have anyone to necessarily look up to, apart from maybe garage producers they knew or something. A lot of the time they were just acting autonomously and their
only real audience was the pirate radio DJ who they would give their dubs to,
or the people that were listening to the stations. But it’s like no one cared.
No one was like, “You can’t do this because that breaks the rules, because
this isn’t house, or this isn’t how garage works.” There wasn’t any of that at
all. But I got into Slimzee because he was quite tightly related to the Roll Deep crew, which Dizzee Rascal was in at the time, and I just started listening to a ton of radio. I used to listen to all sorts of bollocks before that, but basically it just wiped the slate clean for me. I was like, “Oh, OK,
this is what I was meant to do in life. I was meant to play this music.” 
So I would just spend all day long taping radio, listening to radio. We were really
lucky in London that we had this pirate radio culture, because I know it’s
unique to the UK. A lot of countries have something similar, but the way that
the we had it... Our radio’s really tightly controlled. It’s pretty hard to
get a licence. You can only really get a licence if you’re doing something
fairly unique or if you’re serving a community that’s fairly unique, so that’s
how it came about with having a pirate radio culture. I’m sure you guys
already know about that anyway.
Emma Warren  
Although, as I’ve heard Norman Jay say before, in most other countries in the world pirate radio would not be tolerated. People did it in the UK and they sometimes had all
their gear taken away from them or got in trouble with the police, but it was still, not exactly tolerated, but it happened and there are plenty of other places where that would just never have happened.
Bok Bok 
It would have just got shut straight down, yeah, it’s interesting.
Emma Warren  
So we’ve got a lot to be grateful for.
Bok Bok 
We are lucky with that, for sure.
Emma Warren  
But you’ve got a kind of classic piece of Slimzee that I think we should
share. Tell us what it is first.
Bok Bok 
This is the intro to a tape called Sidewinder. Sidewinder was a rave brand
at the time. They were doing really big grime raves and garage raves, and they
would do these tape packs. So this is DJ Slimzee on the turntables and a
really young Dizzee Rascal and a pretty young Wiley on the mic, both sounding
pretty hungry and kind of at their peak.
(music: DJ Slimzee, Dizzee Rascal & Wiley – Sidewinder Intro)
Bok Bok
So they would start off just playing the big vocal tracks of the time and kind
of lead on to actually spitting. Shall I forward a little bit into the tape?
Emma Warren 
We could listen to a tiny bit more, or you can tell us where that energy and feeling and impetus is in what you do, either where it is or where you would want it to be?
Bok Bok 
I mean, I’ve been trying. I don’t want to confuse you guys, there was like a
kind of a soul intro there and stuff like that. If you listen to this tape,
it’s about, how long is it? Is it 45 minutes a side, is that what tapes used
to be? It’s pretty intense. The mixing’s really fast, the BPM is around 138,
140 the whole time, Wiley and Rascal swap bars. It’s like 16 bars, 8 bars,
pass the mic constantly, play around with each other’s bars. The energy’s
unbelievable. You could get this in the rave as well, it wasn’t just a radio thing, this is possible in the club. Basically, that possibility is something I still feel has been untapped, because the way that this music went, the story of this music is like, it didn’t go anywhere near as far as I felt like it should. Grime’s still around, it’s a scene, there’s raves, people like
Butterz are doing great stuff with new artists, but this old aesthetic, this
original aesthetic of grime, of the way it sounded back in 2003 onwards, I do
feel like it’s been lost to the ages. There’s various reasons for that. We had
police crackdowns. We had a ton of prejudice, we had media hype that went down
as fast as it went up, all these different reasons. To me, my whole career is
almost based around a frustration of, “How come this isn’t more celebrated?
Let’s try and capture this vibe.” I’m not trying to make retro grime. That’s
definitely not what I’m trying to do out here, but it’s capturing that energy,
capturing that possibility that a club could be so intense and that dance music and rave music could be at that level of intensity.
Emma Warren  
Can you play something of yours...?
Bok Bok 
Where I’ve tried to do it?
Emma Warren  
Yeah.
Bok Bok 
Sure. You guys probably know my track “Silo Pass,” but I’ll play it anyway.
Emma Warren  
I think that’s the one for now.
(music: Bok Bok – “Silo Pass”)
Bok Bok 
[comments over music] I actually sampled Dizzee Rascal for, what is it, the
first 16 of this or whatever? He was a great producer, that’s another thing
people don’t really know. You guys should go home and check out Dizzee
Rascal’s beats if you don’t know them, because he was great. That’s enough.
[applause]
Emma Warren  
So that’s grime as kind of rude club music, not that it isn’t in other environments, but that’s you making it specifically.
Bok Bok 
That is me specifically making grime.
Emma Warren  
And do you want to break down a little bit what went into that track, for us?
Bok Bok 
Yeah. I went out of my way to figure out exactly how all of my favourite tracks were made, from that era. It was kind of hard because...
Emma Warren  
Did you draw diagrams?
Bok Bok 
I didn’t draw diagrams. It’s more to do with process and sound kits and stuff
like that. This actually applies to my production as a whole. What I’ve been
trying to do is, I’ve been trying to take really technical influences from my
influences. So what I’ll do is, when I like a track I’m going to figure out
how it was done, what equipment was used, what sound kits were used, what drum
machines were used. I’ll recreate it privately as an exercise in just learning
how to produce. So for this whole EP, for the _Southside EP _, which
is what that track came from, I went back and figured out a lot of these
cheap, but no longer available sound kits that were being used at the time in
2003 and 2004 by these London producers.
Emma Warren  
Like what?
Bok Bok 
Like what? OK, so one of them was called Plugsound, and I don’t mind telling you guys about this because good luck finding it. If you can find it, then props to you,
honestly, because it was hard to get it to work. It’s like this free, French
plug-in with just like sound banks, modules and whatnot. The other thing is a
Korg Triton rack. That’s really
important for this whole era, and those are really readily available and also
totally rinsed by The Neptunes, like that’s their whole – that and the, I
think Phantom, is it? - that’s their whole sound. So, good bit of gear, check
that one out. Also the Wiley bass, that kind of comes from that module as
well. So anyway, I spent a little bit of time researching how these things
were made, what effects were used and stuff like that, and then tried to make
it my own. I don’t know to what extent - you guys can be the judges of to what
extent I succeeded - but the point is, it’s trying to pay homage in a fairly
direct way where I actually figure out the processes involved.
Emma Warren  
And it sounds truly wicked.
Bok Bok 
Thanks.
Emma Warren  
Can you tell us what sort of response you got from the grime world on that
tune?
Bok Bok 
Yeah, with that tune I’m pretty happy with myself actually, because I feel
like a lot of people in grime really embraced it. I mean, DJ
Spyro, who’s one of the like - he’s
like a reigning king as a grime DJ, he’s still probably the best grime DJ
around - bootlegged it, or asked to remix it, and a bunch of other people
bootlegged it. Spooky bootlegged it. Spyro
then bootlegged himself. So that’s always a good sign, because that was
another thing that was super appealing to me about that kind of culture is, at
the time, because it was a lot of FruityLoops production and Fruity just lets
you loop stuff up real quick... [noise in the background] Woah! Cool!
[laughter]
Anyone got a field mic?
Emma Warren  
I feel like this is just a signal, it’s just like this is a raw track.
Bok Bok 
This is the rave siren. Track’s too hot.
Emma Warren  
Yeah, you just got it burning up then.
Bok Bok 
So yeah, Spyro did that remix and has been playing it. Although interestingly,
Spyro will only play - he was only interested in the first 16 of the drop, as
soon as the Arp comes in he’s like,
“Nah, I’m out.” So I guess some of the otherness of it was still not that much
embraced, but the point is people played it. People in the grime scene played
it, people considered it a grime track. I got a lot of feedback from OG
producers saying, this sounds really authentic, this sounds like it’s from
that classic era, which I think everyone misses. I’m not the only one that
feels like that. It feels like everyone who was into that music is slightly
teary-eyed about it, because it just disappeared.
Emma Warren  
Well, I guess it didn’t disappear because it just mutated into other things, but there weren’t enough of those records. There’s a kind of canon and there’s
not millions of them.
Bok Bok 
There’s a canon, and the potential is hinted at. The surface has been
scratched, that’s the thing. I’m not ready to leave it behind, for that
reason. Because I feel like there’s so much potential there and you can make
that music for years and you can still come out with amazing, original stuff.
Emma Warren  
Can we talk a bit more about some of your other productions, because actually,
even though it’s kind of your co-label - that’s not quite the right sentence,
but you know what I mean - it took you a little while to actually put your
music out. I mean, not that you weren’t making stuff, because I know you were
making stuff, but how come it took a little while?
Bok Bok 
I’m pretty time-starved because I do a lot of stuff with this label. I’m just
going to say, if anyone wants to start a label you better clear out your next
year and a half at least. Clear your schedules, basically. So it’s like that,
it just ate my life, especially because I’m involved in a lot of aspects of
it – from the art direction through to the audio direction and mixing and all
that kind of stuff. It’s just time. Then between that and doing DJ shows and
stuff, it means that I’m really limited for studio time. I always really envy
producers that can just sit down and bang out a track from start to finish in
half an hour. I might be able to do the core idea in half an hour, and I
definitely try to not to string it out, because I feel like, if it’s not
happening move onto the next thing. That’s always been my approach, but I
can’t finish stuff. I need to really get into a zone where I’ve got like three
weeks of nothing else but studio, at least. Then I can write a record. But I
haven’t had that for years, so that’s the reason that I’m a little bit slow.
Emma Warren  
So can we hear something else of yours?
Bok Bok 
Yeah, what shall I play?
Emma Warren  
Well, you were talking about the Tom
Trago stuff. You weren’t here, but...
Bok Bok 
I’ll play that after. I want to play for you guys this track “MJT,” which I
mentioned at the start, because this track kind of became the template to what
I’m doing now. This came out on Night Slugs White Label series.
(music: Bok Bok – “MJT” / applause)
Bok Bok
Thanks. So the thing with that track is, the sample, the little key and the
one little bass note, is from a Mary Jane
Girls track that was produced by Rick James. It’s like a really sweet boogie love song and it’s like, the idea of taking that little snippet and making it like that. Originally, this track was called - I shortened it down because I thought it was a bit uncool to say it, but it was called “Mary Jane Torture,” because the repetition is meant to be unpleasant to the max. It’s meant to take something that used to
be about love and human feelings and then make it feel really un-human. And that’s kind of become the template for what I’m trying to do with my next record, my next EP.
Emma Warren  
Is there anything you can tell us about the next EP?
Bok Bok 
Er, no, not for now. Mainly because of what I was saying earlier on, because
of how I’m pretty time-starved. And I just want to let the music speak.
Emma Warren  
Fairly soon we’re going to put it out to questions for you lot, but I want to
talk a little bit more about some of your production and some newer stuff,
the newer faces that have become part of Night Slugs. Let’s stick with you for
the minute. What else have you got going on, producer-wise?
Bok Bok 
So, I’ve got a collaboration with a guy called Tom Trago from Amsterdam, which
started off as a one-off, but I think we’re going to keep it going because
we’ve done it two years in a row now. We take a few weeks in August and just
get together in his studio. He’s got a really amazing studio in Amsterdam, not
amazing for the equipment, although he has got cool stuff in there, but just
the vibe. It’s beautiful and we always make cool shit in there. Originally,
Teki Latex from Sound Pellegrino asked us to collaborate. That was his idea, but since
then me and Tom have gone off on one and I think we’ve got at least three
12”, probably coming later this year. They just need to be edited and
mixed and all the other stuff that needs to happen. But yeah, it’s a different
project. What we do together is much more analogue jam kind of vibes. We’ll
get in a room, we’ll get few machines going and just see what happens, record
long takes and then try and edit something together out of that. The core
ideas of the tracks definitely happen within half an hour or something like
that, just while we’re together, and we try and keep as much of the live takes
as possible.
Emma Warren  
What is it about him or that scenario that makes it a good collaboration for
you?
Bok Bok 
Because we do come from really different places. He hasn’t got my roots, and
he’s really into disco. I love disco too, but it’s just to do with
what your true passions are what actually feeds directly into your music. He
makes a lot of house. When we come together the things that we’ve got in
common tend to be Chicago music, house, some disco stuff, some boogie stuff,
synthy kind of stuff and I guess there’s less of an emphasis on - I don’t
know, it’s kind of hard to put into words - but there’s less of an emphasis on
making it like super cutting-edge club kind of stuff and more of just trying
to create a nice vibe that maybe references the things we both like.
Emma Warren  
It’s funny because again I’ve you seen you before mentioning Dance Mania and Lil Louis and that kind of
mid- to late ‘80s Chicago vibe.
Bok Bok 
And ‘90s too.
Emma Warren  
Later stuff as well?
Bok Bok 
Yeah, definitely.
Emma Warren  
So what is it about that sound that appeals to you?
Bok Bok 
It’s hard to say what it is in words. I love house music but I think people
have different ideas of what that is, but to me it’s like, that is what I love
about house music, because of that Chicago sound. But it’s much the same as
what appeals to me about grime, really.
Emma Warren  
There’s a rawness.
Bok Bok 
There’s a rawness, there’s a level of intensity there that other music doesn’t
reach, and a level of honesty. You can kind of hear how it was made and who it
was made by, in a way, even though it’s electronic music. Again, it’s got that
whole potential for emotiveness, and I don’t know, there’s just so much power
in it. That’s another time I think when clubs were being really, really
challenged by productions.
Emma Warren  
What do you mean by clubs being challenged by productions?
Bok Bok 
Not thinking, “OK, I’m going to make a club track,” and thinking that’s a
reductive process, actually thinking that’s the biggest challenge ever. Like,
how do I make people dance and feel good or feel physially engaged, while also
making them feel something else?
Emma Warren  
Or that thing about making people like stuff that they don’t yet understand...
Bok Bok 
Yeah, making people physically react with their bodies, by dancing, to things
that their brains aren’t up to speed with yet.
Emma Warren  
I guess that’s partly to do with a challenge for the dancefloor, but it’s also
often a challenge between producers, isn’t it, of like, how can I step up to
this next level? And I guess that’s something that you’ve seen, that will
always be present in those nightclub worlds that have ended up creating
amazing music.
Bok Bok 
That’s why I’m so into the idea of community, because I love the idea that
we’re a community of producers and we’ve got this dialogue going on between
us. That’s definitely true for the Night Slugs label. That track “Her” that I
played by Jam City from his album, that’s definitely influenced the _Club
Constructions _series, and we just have these memes that go back and forward.
Hopefully everyone in the camp feels mutual about this, but we like to think
the ideas are there on the table and it’s kind of a push-pull, call and
response situation.
Emma Warren  
So can you tell us about some of the people that more recently joined the
camp?
Bok Bok 
Yeah. So, one of our new recruits is a guy called Helix who is a US producer. He’s from Georgia. He’s cool as well, but it’s
like he had to be in Night Slugs, because he gets exactly the right crossover.
He loves grime, he loves rap, he loves techno and he loves house, he loves
disco and all the right things.
Emma Warren  
Did he know that he had to be on Night Slugs?
Bok Bok 
No, he didn’t. Girl Unit actually kind of A&R’d that one. He showed
me a track called “Drum Track,”
and we ended up signing it and putting it out. So Girl Unit, that goes out to
you, that one. But yeah, he definitely belongs and I think he feels that way
too, hopefully. His next release with us is a_ Club Constructions_ volume. I’m
really interested in what’s going on with Club Constructions, because me and
L-Vis gave everyone a set of parameters, which all started with L-Vis’s first
Club Constructions record, some of the things are like, the reverbs have to
be super short and tight.
Emma Warren  
So you’ve actually got a list of Dogme-type rules?
Bok Bok 
Yeah, there’s a manifesto of sorts. The whole point of Club Constructions
is, while the rest of the label is trying to get into maybe slightly loftier
territories, where we’re really trying to be a little bit more out there, I
guess, with some of the stuff we’re doing. We definitely want to keep one foot
in constantly producing new, really functionalist club music that doesn’t
necessarily have much content. It’s drums, you know, it’s club tools, DJ
tools, it’s functionalist.
Emma Warren  
So what are the rules, then?
Bok Bok 
So as I say, one of them is no long reverbs. One of them is no unnecessary
vocals. I don’t know how many people know “Bring In The Katz,” but that came out as a
Club Constructions record, and that’s a vocal record. But I would argue the
vocals are absolutely essential for that one to work. So it’s these things, no
unnecessary vocal samples, no unnecessary long reverbs or effects. All these
rules have been broken somewhere already in the Club Constructions
catalogue, but it has to feel a certain way, like, we encourage tape
saturation for that project. There’s a few different things, I can’t actually
remember all of them.
Emma Warren  
It’s a weird thing to mention, really, but in George Orwell’s five rules of writing the last rule is, “Break all these rules rather than say anything outright barbarous.”
Bok Bok 
Cool. We definitely encourage that, for sure. As I say, the rules have been
broken over the time, but they’ve got to be broken in the right way. I’m
really interested in the fact that because we created these parameters - or
not because of that, but maybe that aided the process a little bit - but
what’s happened with Club Constructions a little bit now is that the
producers have gone away and the series has its own sound. And you guys will
see from some of the stuff that ends up coming out, like the next three
releases that are lined up, they all sound really similar in the best possible
way. They’re all done by three different people. I just find that fascinating
that they can communicate with music. None of them wrote to each other and
were like, “So, what are you doing for your CC release? Are you going to do
it like this or are you going to do it like that?” None of them did that, it’s
just musical ideas. They hear me play the demos on Rinse FM and they go away
and they make something else. It’s a beautiful thing.
Emma Warren  
So can you play us a more recent release that illustrates something about
where you’re collectively are at the moment?
Bok Bok 
I guess Club Constructions would be a good place to do that. I’ll play
something from the next Helix. This is a particularly brutalist piece, but
hopefully you will see the influence, because I really feel like this one was
influenced by the Jam City track I played.
(music: Helix – “Linn Jam (No
Synth)”)
Bok Bok 
There’s almost no point playing this in its entirety, because it is that, that
is it. But I want to play another one just to illustrate the point I’m making.
This is by a different producer. I’m not going to say who yet, but this is
another forthcoming Club Constructions thing. It’s not the same but the
relationship’s there, I think.
(music: Hysterics – “Pleasuredrome” / applause)
Emma Warren  
Shall we head back into ‘off the record’ territory again for one track, before
we put it out to questions?
Bok Bok 
Yeah, let’s do that. So this is something that I’ve... we didn’t talk about
Fade To Mind. It would be good to introduce them a little bit first. A recent development with Night Slugs is...
Emma Warren  
The thing is, this is a live edit so we have to make sure that we’re clear about which bits we keep in and which bits we don’t. So we’re keeping this in?
Bok Bok 
Yeah, we should keep this in. There’s a recent development with Night Slugs,
which is cool, and again points to the organic way in which we work and the way
that everythings developing. Kingdom, who is an artist that released on Night Slugs several times and has been part of our family - like I said earlier on,
he was one of the ones whose productions really made us start a label in the
first place - he recently started his own label and that’s called Fade To
Mind. We’re calling it a ‘sister labels’ because they’ve kind of taken a lot of
cues from our template and done their own thing with it. They’ve filled up
that template with their own content, but there are similar parameters there.
We’re all friends, it’s people like
Nguzunguzu, Prince William and DJ Rizla, Mike Q is involved. There’s a lot of people who we’re already sharing music with and sharing ideas with. But more than that, I
think structurally, the way it’s been set up and the way that Kingdom is looking after everyone’s mixes and trying to keep a cohesive element there,
and the way that their art has a relationship with all the rest of their
art...
Emma Warren  
Because there’s an artwork link, a relationship, isn’t there?
Bok Bok 
Yeah, there’s an artwork relationship, even literally in the template - they
use the same cover template as we do for their EPs - and we definitely want to
make that link explicit. So it’s interesting, it’s a way in which people are
influencing each other. I find it really interesting because to a large extent
it’s hands off, it’s not me and L-Vis sitting there telling people, “This is
going to be your next move,” or anything like that. They’ve gone off on their
own and done that and it’s very much their project, their baby, which leads us
onto what you were about to ask. So, if we can once again go off the record...
Emma Warren  
We’re on, we’re off...
Bok Bok 
Sorry to be awkward, but when stuff isn’t finished I don’t want it out there
yet. So, Fade To Mind have a new artist, Kelela. She’s a singer and she’s
about to do a mixtape with them. It’s 15 tracks and it’s like, so many
producers from Night Slugs, so many producers from Fade To Mind have
productions on there. It’s kind of an interesting thing for us because it’s a
first. We’re all interested in producing for vocal projects, but it’s really
the first time that any of us have been able to do that with someone and to a
level where we feel really kind of satisfied by it. So I wanted to play you
guys my beat for that project and how that came out.
(music: Kelela - “A Lie” / applause)
Bok Bok 
Thanks, guys.
Emma Warren  
Wow, that’s a wow. So, questions. Who’s got the microphone? Who has some
questions?
Audience Member 
Hey. I was wondering if you could tell us about how it’s different to produce
for a vocalist, and how was your process different?
Bok Bok 
I’m really new to it, actually, so I’m still figuring that out. But with the
track I just played, I feel like I had to take cues from the lyrical content,
I had to take cues from what was already there. The process with that was kind
of interesting because I came into that when there was already a demo there,
which had a completely different production, but the vocal was similar and the
vocal melody was similar. So, I wrote around it and I felt like there was a
certain vulnerability and softness that I needed to preserve. I worked really
differently on that one, especially with the way I treated the drums and everything like that. I really wanted to work totally differently on that track to the way I would work for club music, because it’s one of the first times I’ve done a track that was explicitly not really a club track. But
Kelela and I are planning to work more in future on stuff which will be more
for my project, which will be clubby. I definitely want to negotiate a way to
make club vocal music that doesn’t necessarily have to compromise or change
the way that it works, compared to what I normally do. But for that particular
track I definitely wanted to keep things really held back and really gentle.
But at the same time I wanted to give it an edge, so there is this weight to
it, like there’s the sub bass, which you wouldn’t get in a ballad normally,
because I always want to subvert things a little bit.
Audience Member 
Hey man, thanks for being here.
Bok Bok 
My pleasure.
Audience Member 
Also, thanks for repping the South. There’s a lot of good dance music in the
South, and I don’t think it gets repped enough, thank you. But my question to
you is, I think we didn’t touch on it enough, but the artwork I think plays a
very important role in your label’s direction, at least coming from my
perspective, and everything almost seems very airtight, and the branding is on
point. How much time did you spend on that, what was your vision on that, who
did you get to work? Can you explain all that, because I think that’s one of
the strongest parts next to the music?
Bok Bok 
Thanks for bringing it up. I spent a ton of time on it. I’m trying to spend less time on it because, really, I want to be in the studio, but it’s another one of those things which initially started off with not having much of a plan or we didn’t really have a map of how it was going to develop or anything like that. I just made the [Mosca] cover and I had certain ideas at the time. I was watching the Panasonic “Glider”
video - I don’t know if people
are familiar with that, but it’s a piece of early electronic art, which was
generated electronically. It looks kind of naive these days, but it’s groundbreaking. It’s a little bit like the Tron aesthetic, it’s a little bit like that wireframe, slightly ‘80s-looking. But really, to me it looks like modernism so that’s why I’m drawn to it. Those are the influences for the
early art. I guess what I was really trying to do was illustrate the music in
a really literal way, in a synaesthetic way. If you guys aren’t familiar with
synaesthesia, it’s like the effect of one sense making you get another sense,
so it’s like taste making you feel like you’re being touched. So it’s like,
when you hear music, what do you see? It was literally an exercise in that. So, for the first year or so of Night Slugs, I was just doing these really simple - what I saw as modernist, hopefully - illustrations that would go some way to giving the music a little visual home to live in. I guess that hasn’t
really changed, that remit hasn’t really changed, but the main thing that has
changed is that the production’s just gone way higher, the standards of what
the visuals actually look like. The biggest catalyst for that was Jam City’s
album project, which has a really interesting story behind i,  which is kind of long, so I probably won’t get into it. Basically, we were forced to do a 3D
render for that project. Not many people realise that’s what it is. It’s not a
photo, it’s 3D. Since then we’ve been doing this really intricate 3D pieces,
which take forever, and the way that that’s done is, me and the artist will
put together a wireframe or - it’s kind of just like a layout. We’ll say how
it’ll be laid out, we’ll say what textures are going to be applied, so we
fully art-direct the whole piece, and then we hand it over to a 3D person who
will then create it for us. It’s pretty cool, and it’s getting more hands-off,
which I’m happy about. I want other people to be able to contribute to it and
I don’t want it to be just me any more, so it’s developing, it’s cool.
Audience Member 
Thanks man, I appreciate it.
Bok Bok 
Pleasure.
Emma Warren  
Any more, or are you all so blissed out by that last piece of music that all
the questions have left your mind? If so, feel free to come and talk in
person.
Bok Bok 
Yeah, I’m around. I’ll be around all day today, so see you guys around.
Emma Warren  
Definitely, so I think a big round of applause, thank you.
[applause]
