Chloé is one of those people who just makes electronic music a better place to be. With an early interest in electronic and dance music, she first showed up on most people’s radars with some expert productions and compilations for Kill The DJ, BPitch and other key labels in the early 2000s. From there she further refined her distinct approach to playing live and working in the studio informed by her voracious appetite for music and keen ear for composition.
In this lecture at the 2008 Red Bull Music Academy in Barcelona, the French adventurer revealed the details of her progression through the electronic music ranks and what keeps her inspired.
Gerd Janson  
This afternoon lecture features a guest from Paris, France, a DJ, producer,
and if you want an electronic songwriter. She has done records on Karat and
Kill the DJ, and has released her
debut album The Waiting Room. Please give a very warm welcome to Chloé from Paris,
France. [applause] 
If one looks at your name on Discogs, there is a
description saying your music is somewhere between German minimalism and dirty electro.
Chloé 
It is always easier to give words to which category you belong to, and in
another way I don’t like it because it gives only a few words on a spectrum of
music. I like a lot of different styles but I think basically I like house
music and I play house music in a general way.
Gerd Janson  
But how did you get into it?
Chloé  
I started to DJ more than ten years ago, maybe 12 or 13 years ago. It was a
time in France where electronic music was not so famous as it is today maybe,
and I discovered electronic music because I started to go out to parties and I
really liked it. In France, there were raves going on. I was based in Paris and in Paris and there
were very few parties going on in some clubs, but mainly it was gay clubs. There were
three gay clubs and that was where there was house music and also there were some techno
DJs got invited at Rex Club. That is how I came
into electronic music. I was in between the Rex Club when Laurent Garnier had his residency at
that time. There are a lot of producers, French producers, that were at Rex
Club on Thursdays listening to Laurent Garnier, and he was a big inspiration
for a lot of producers and DJs.
Gerd Janson  
Maybe you can describe a little bit what’s so great about Rex and Laurent
Garnier on a Thursday night?
Chloé  
The fact that it was one of maybe the only parties going on in Paris, where he
was playing very eclectic music. He made us discover the whole [spectrum] of
house music, and you could understand how to build a set from beginning to the
end. I think he keeps going and he still likes to play a lot, for three or four
hours, six hours, and it is because of these parties. He still likes to show
to the people that he can build a set, a six-hour set, with the warm-up and
the peak time and the ending. Nowadays, sometimes I feel it is a bit sad, because some
parties you are invited to and you play two hours, one hour and 30 minutes,
but part of being a DJ is to really play more than three hours because you can
express yourself much more.
Gerd Janson  
Do you think this makes sense at all, flying DJs around the world to places
and clubs they have never been to, playing for people they have never seen
before, knowing nothing about their musical education? Is it not the dream of
a DJ, doing something like Laurent had done at the Rex Club, playing every
Thursday to a dedicated following?
Chloé  
Rex Club and Laurent Garnier was a musical identity, really together, and at
one time the party became so famous he was invited everywhere all over the
world because of this party. I had a residency for eight years in Paris at a
place called Le Pulp and
it’s helped me a lot how to understand building a warm-up. I could play
differently from two o’clock or five o’clock or midnight and I think it really
helped me. But I think it makes sense to go and share the music. The promoters
that invite you in general know your music and know the people who are coming
to the club so it should be a good combination. If it does not work, there is
a problem somewhere and maybe it is not right moment.
Gerd Janson  
How often does it not work for you?
Chloé  
I play every weekend, Friday and Saturday in general. I go to clubs where I
know the promoters. I have been everywhere, maybe alI over Europe, and all the clubs that invite me know, so
I go regularly to a lot of clubs all over the world, mainly in Europe. So the
more you go, and the more the crowd likes that you are here, then it is like a
residency. For example, I am resident in Frankfurt at Robert
Johnson, I have played there for six years
every three or four months. Sometimes I don’t play for eight months, but then
suddenly I am re-invited. I play sometimes at
Fabric in London, too, twice a year. It is kind
of a residency but it can be like every month or every two months, every six months.
Gerd Janson  
Robert Johnson and Fabric are quite different, the way the clubs are. Can you describe that a little bit? What constitutes a great club in your opinion?
Chloé  
In my opinion, it has nothing to do really with the country. One city is very different to one city. In one city you can have five clubs and each club has its own atmosphere and you would be in this club because the other clubs won’t
fit. Robert Johnson is a very, very small club, maybe it has 200 people, OK maybe 400, and
the good thing about Robert Johnson is, it is not like underground, it is in
front of a river so that makes it all really nice. And the soundsystem is
really nice. The owner of Robert Johnson is
Ata from the label Playhouse and he took care of everything, he has a very good soundsystem and he likes to
share. The party starts at 11 and it stops whenever it has to stop and there
is no six o’clock, like in Paris, for example. Maybe like in Berlin, because you can stop
where you want to stop. I prefer not to stop too late because I don’t like to
play to the “too late” people, it is not the same music.
Gerd Janson  
In Berlin, they never stop.
Chloé  
In Berlin, they never stop and you have all these kind of clubs too and I think you play the
music for the kind of crowd you want to play to.
Gerd Janson  
Maybe we can hear something that you would play in a club to give people an
idea what kind of stuff you actually play?
Chloé  
OK, I have a lot of tracks, it depends if you want a warm-up or peak time.
(music: Chloé & Krikor — unknown)
Chloé  
Krikor is a French producer who released some EPs on Karat Recordings, the
same label as I released my first EP. And he is one of my very good friends in the electronic scene. We have a new
project together that we started, because the idea was to make and share
something and play live together. Usually, as a DJ, you always travel alone, you play alone, but you are with the people at the same time, and the idea was to
make another project with a friend of mine, and make the travel and get
something going on with someone who you have the same atmosphere [with].
Gerd Janson  
People always tend to forget about that part of being a DJ, right? That you spend a lot of
time at the airport and alone in a hotel room somewhere. When does it start to
become tiring for you? Or is it not tiring at all and you love it all so much
that it is a pleasure?
Chloé  
It starts to be tiring when I play too much. If I play too much, when I go back
home, I don’t have any more energy to pick up the phone, to see my friends or
do normal things. I just want to go to bed and spend quiet time, to take more
energy. Sometimes it’s very tiring when I play too much. One time I was
playing too much and was playing Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and
each day you are in this city and this country, and then the next day you have
to leave the hotel room to take your plane and you see only hotels,
airports, cars, taxis and clubs and there is a repetition. The great part is
the moment when you are with the public, but you have all this around it and
you have to find a balance in between this moment and you want to give the
maximum energy. I remember at that time I started to be really tired and I
didn’t even want to go and have dinner with the promoters before the party. I
think it’s a bit sad when you go to a party and don’t want to be with the
promoters who invited you at least. I started to make it a bit more quiet,
so I usually try not to take too many bookings. For example, if I play three
times a week, the next week I try to play once. Sometimes I don’t take
weekends. I see all my plans and try to keep my energy. Also, because I
produce, I need to be at home to produce and have time to produce. It’s
important to find time also to produce, especially nowadays as all the DJs these
days, the main ones, are producing and I think it is very important to also
produce and be invited as a DJ. It’s very important to find this balance.
Gerd Janson  
You are doing these records these days to have a business card, so to speak?
Chloé  
Yes, in a way it’s the truth. Nowadays, everyone can DJ. I remember when I was 14,
my dream was to have a guitar so I had a guitar and it wasn’t so expensive.
Today a person of like 13 or 14 years old wants to be a DJ and so it is not the
same economy because the parents have to pay for it and it’s really, really
expensive. I remember in Paris when I was younger, the people who had the first
turntables and samplers, because you had to buy samplers to make music, you had to buy a synthesizer, you
couldn’t make music just with your computer. It was the people who were rich
and had money and so it was not possible for a lot of the young people. It was
not this electronic music as well, it was not so famous.
Gerd Janson  
In Paris, at least?
Chloé  
I guess, everywhere. In Germany, I think, it was much bigger, of course, that
was a big time also in Germany.
Gerd Janson  
Do you think this democratization process is a good thing then, to make the
production means available to everyone?
Chloé  
When I was younger I remember I really could not understand why this music was
not more famous. I was really frustrated not to find this music on CDs. I was
really frustrated that this music was seen in very negative ways. I was really
part of this person that wanted to show to the people that this music was more
than just… I don’t know, that there was something special going on. Meeting with other people was totally different and also the DJ, what he was expressing, that
was totally different from a rock group or just general music. Then it became
famous and always when something becomes famous, at one point you are very
happy, but on the other side the whole marketing took it its own way. I think
it happens the same maybe for rock & roll, then marketing speaks more than the
artists. It’s good if you have marketing and you can express yourself, but if
marketing makes you think you have to do this and this to work, then it kills
artistic things, I think. Again you have to the find this balance to make it
your own way.
Gerd Janson  
And you always knew that you wanted to make music back then? You just
mentioned when you were very young and stumbled across that kind of electronic
music, it was clear to you that you want to do it yourself?
Chloé  
Actually, I never planned really to become a DJ, it just happened. When I was
younger anyway I was really into music and my mother was always listening to music,
putting on her music really loud. I was always complaining when I was younger because the
music was too loud. My mother was partying all the time and she used to be
also a DJ. She is English, actually, as you can tell from my accent — I am
kidding. She used to DJ in some clubs, but she was more a disc jockey than a
DJ, she was playing more like Motown things. My father had this big collection of classical stuff, and also
things like Pink Floyd and the Beatles, and I was always
listening to it. And he was always playing guitar. That is the reason why I
started to play guitar. I grew up with music, then I bought my guitar and I
started to make music and then I discovered electronic music. At that time also I
had a group with another person and we were doing tracks on a four-track mixer. We didn’t have the materials really to make music. And then when I discovered
the technology of how to make electronic music, I used it with my guitar to
make it sound a bit better than the four-track mixer.
Gerd Janson  
But you don’t have anything of that time with you, stuff you did back then?
Chloé  
I think it’s not possible anyway to listen to it, the sound is too crappy and it’s really, really silly. We
didn’t think too much about the music, we were trying to find some noises and
making noises, and in a way, if I make you listen to it, I don’t have it
anyway, but it is really silly music.
Gerd Janson  
Do you have something like the music you were listening to back then from your
mother and father, that you still listen to now, that is still important to
you?
Chloé  
It is still very important to me, of course. Sometimes, when I write my
mother she likes it that I put on some music, and if I don’t have music she
is really complaining, “You are not funny, you don’t have music.” I say, “Yes,
I have music, but I’m not going to make you listen now.” And if I don’t have
Motown records or if I don’t have some tracks she likes, she doesn’t want to listen to music.
Gerd Janson  
So she doesn’t like the stuff you are doing now?
Chloé  
She likes my music and she is quite proud of my music. When I make music, I make her listen and I think she has a good point of view. If she likes it in general I
think it is like, “OK, I think I am on a good way.”
Gerd Janson  
She is your quality control?
Chloé  
I think so, for me.
Gerd Janson  
What is her favorite track of yours that you did?
Chloé  
I think it is a track off my album, maybe I can play it, the track is called
“The Door.”
(music: Chloé – “The Door”)
So this is really the example of the fact that I use the guitar, the
instrument I was using before electronic music, and then using the electronic
things to make music as if you had a whole band.
Gerd Janson  
And your voice as well, that was your voice, so you weren’t too interested in
making just a club album or something like that?
Chloé  
I produced also some club tracks, but my production it was always a bit
different from my DJing, because when you DJ, of course, you can play this
kind of track in a warm-up, in the beginning, but in general it doesn’t make
sense to play it in the middle of a party. I think in production you have more
space to express yourself and make whatever you want. On the album I wanted to
make the expression of what I play and also what I produce and try and find an in-between. I think you can be very slow and have no beats, but you still can
find the same energy as in the club. This is what I really like and what I try to
create in general by finding the sounds. I think I am really into searching for
textures. Also, using the voice like an instrument, and I never put the
voice up front like a real song. Of course, I use it a bit like that, but it’s
never too much.
Gerd Janson  
Lyrics aren’t important? Like, when you say just use a voice as an instrument?
Chloé  
I’m not a writer, I usually don’t write lyrics really but there are some
lyrics that come quite often so I try and create a story. I try to anyway.
Gerd Janson  
And you mentioned Pulp, the club where you started to play, and if I’m not
mistaken, it was with Jennifer
Cardini and Fany, I don’t actually know how
you pronounce her name in French, you shared this residency and perhaps it is
something you can talk a little bit about, this kind of scene in Paris and how
important it was for the city?
Chloé  
This club was existing for quite a long time and it wasn’t very interesting
for the electronic scene because it was during the day mainly, dancing for old
people. On Wednesday, it was rock parties, Saturdays it was a club just for
girls, and we thought there was something missing so I started to play there
on Fridays and it was parties for gay, but it was gay-friendly. From zero to three o’clock it
was generalist music, but the real generalist music, and then at three o’clock
when I started to play, half of the club was leaving and half of the club was
staying and there was a part of the people staying that didn’t like the music
because it was new for them. So it was a very important residency, especially
to create something for the public, and at three o’clock it was a time where
people are really into the music so you can play whatever you want. Then
slowly, we started to have Fridays, really from the beginning to the end, and
that is how we started to then go all night and do the warm-up and then the
party started to become famous. So we had the Thursday and then we started to
invite international DJs.
Gerd Janson
Like who was important for you then? 
Chloé  
For example we brought over some artists from
Kompakt, for example. They were the first to
bring me to Germany, maybe in 2000. I was playing in Germany, these artists,
we invited them to Pulp because nobody was really interested in this music
then. There was a record shop called Catapult in Paris and they were promoting
this kind of music, like records from Germany and minimal music. Catapult were always
organizing parties at Rex Club and were inviting people too. But it was really slowly,
it was a work in progress in finding people like that. It was free entrance,
too, so that was kind of new for Paris to have an international DJ in a small club with
a free entrance and that also helped for the success of the night, I think.
Gerd Janson  
People like to come if they don’t have to pay. 
Chloé
Always.
Gerd Janson  
And do you have a track from that
time that was very important to you that you always played or which reminds
you of that time?
Chloé  
It’s a bit difficult to listen to just one track to say, “OK, this is
representative of the club.” There was this track that maybe a lot of us were
playing because even the people who didn’t like electronic music liked this
kind of track that you will probably recognize, acid.
(music: Winx – “Don’t Laugh”)
Very classic, but that’s one
of the tracks that was quite easy to play for girls that didn’t like
electronic music and it’s still a track that I think is very important to electronic
dance culture or house music.
Gerd Janson  
It somehow captures that crazy feeling at eight o’clock in the morning, right? Or six
o’clock? You said “playing for girls,” so is it different to play a gay party
than playing at a mixed party?
Chloé  
Actually, it is just that in Paris especially, as I was saying, in the
beginning the main parties with electronic music were because of the gay
culture and the gay parties. So the first parties I was invited to [were those] and
that is why I was resident of Pulp. Also, I was playing at other gay parties
and I’m still playing sometimes in Paris at gay parties, and I think they are
usually really funny and fun parties. It’s always gay-friendly, really open. It’s
true that it’s less serious than going to Rex Club, for example, listening to a DJ. Also, the Rex Club has a really huge soundsystem,
especially after this year. They changed everything and it has speakers
everywhere, maybe it’s a bit more like Fabric in London, it’s realy the culture of
the sound, the quality sound. OK, it is not the same kind of music you would play at a
gay party. The sound is more crappy so it’s really different. In Pulp
they prefer to put money, for example, into the lights instead of money into
the monitors, so we were these kind of DJs who grew up with this kind of
thing. We can go and play in the kind of parties like Rex Club, but also, we
can play on soundsystems that are more crappy, so you always try and be careful with what you
play. There are some tracks that are not good on some soundsystems and are
better with another soundsystem.
Gerd Janson  
If the soundsystem is crap, it doesn’t matter as long as the party is fun? Because if you were eight years playing in Pulp and the soundsystem wasn’t great
that can be frustrating as well.
Chloé  
Yes, I think it can be frustrating if nobody cared, but the fact that people are so
happy that you come and play. If I have the technical things that
I asked for, then I can play. Sometimes I refuse if the soundsystem is
really, really crappy because that stresses me and then, if you’re stressed,
you can’t share your music, really.
Gerd Janson  
What technical things do you require these days?
Chloé  
I usually ask for a Pioneer, this kind of Pioneer [gesturing at the CD-J in front of her], a CD player. I have my
records and I have my Serato system and
so I play Serato and I control it with CDs and also my vinyl, but I have to
say I play mainly with my Serato. I have to say the whole system has changed
and slowly imposed that we have to play this way. In Paris, for example, all
the good record shops closed because nobody was coming any more. Slowly, the
kids that were basically the people who were helping promote this music
changed into Serato or Traktor. I used to receive a lot of the
vinyls and now I receive downloads so I play what I receive and it is
downloads. When I like a track I just ask if I can have a
WAV, not an mp3, and then I continue to
play with CDs. I am used to having tracks on CD, so it’s just like the same
thing.
Gerd Janson  
But you’re not one of those people who are very sad about this whole DJ thing
more and more transforming into a digital kind of era?
Chloé  
Of course I would love and prefer to play on vinyl, but I would miss a lot of tracks and
a lot of new artists. I would miss a lot of good things because in Paris we
don’t have any more good record shops. If I am in Berlin or Frankfurt, I go in the
record shops, but in Paris it’s a big city but there’s no more good record shops. As a DJ
you want to play the best, so you search and you have much more possibility
through trying to find things on the net. Of course, sometimes it is a bit
tiring because during the week you are in the house and you check emails, you
make music, I’d use my computer, and I play on the weekend and use myself
Serato, and sometimes it is a bit boring this way.
Gerd Janson  
You are in front of the computer 24/7?
Chloé  
Now it becomes like a real instrument, but at the same time it gives so much
possibility, and I think it is really good for the new generation coming that
they can have and play music and make music with software and for less money.
A lot of people can express themselves, and I think it’s very important that
you can express yourself.
Gerd Janson  
And getting back to your album, there are also two tracks on there that you
have actually done for a whole other project, for a conservatory. Maybe you
can talk a little bit and explain what you are doing, which is like a research
kind of project?
Chloé  
I was for four years in the Paris
Conservatoire and it was
very interesting. It actually was an electro-acoustic class, so the idea was to
help you make an electro-acoustic track. So during the whole year you had to
think about making a project like this, so it was quite a new experience to make the
track in one year, which is quite a long time. I was there for four years so I
made four tracks.
Gerd Janson  
Why does it take so long, a whole year?
Chloé  
I had a teacher that was very interesting, he’s an electro-acoustic composer
from Argentina, whose name is Octavio
Lopez and he was
really into helping us, pushing us between the concrete music and the electro-acoustic. We had to work with instruments, we had to work with professional instrumentalists, so
the first year I worked with a contrabassists, and it takes you a long
time because you have to learn how contrabass plays, what are the different
possibilities, the classical possibilities and then the contemporary
possibilities. Then you record with him some sounds, from basic sounds to more
different sounds that he can make. Then you put in your session and the idea
is to make a track with the texture of the contrabass. All this sound was taken
from the contrabass and I was using a lot of different software, like every
kind of possibility I could use and you could not recognize that it was made
with the contrabass. And then the contrabass at the end, and you write on the
contrabass and he plays on your track, and it has to be in one piece. So it’s
really electro-acoustic, really in between. On my album I just took 20 seconds
or 15 seconds of two pieces I did, which makes interludes in my album. So I
can, for example, make you listen to an extract.
Gerd Janson  
How long are the extracts in their original form?
Chloé  
They are 15 minutes, but the interesting thing is that you can make whatever
you want. Even if you make two minutes, it is a concept and so it is
interesting to them. But in one year it does not make sense, so in general it’s between 10 and 15 minutes, but it can be 30 minutes. Finding the textures
and playing them, it’s not at all synthesized music, it’s only textures that
you edit from one millisecond to one second. It is not just like playing a
synthesizer, for example. So this is an extract, a really short one. [plays extract] So this was made only with the contrabass, you could hear the chord
of the cello hitting, for example, and there is another one, also a short
interlude I put on my album, and the first sound is a flute. [plays extract] And so at the end of the year each year the conservatoire presents the piece. as they
say.
Gerd Janson  
And you get a degree?
Chloé  
No, it’s just a project and it’s a really personal project, just to help you make it. You are in the
room and there are 80 speakers all over the place and you have a mixer, but not
a normal mixer, it’s an inverse mixer, so you control all the speakers and you
specialize your piece. Each speaker has its own [character]. There are some
speakers that have more bass, some are more clear. So you make the sound come from
here and go to there. You specialize it, and this helped me a lot in my
electronic composition. That was very inspiring and pushed me more to compose and find textures, and
I really liked it in this way. I don’t pretend to say, “OK, now I do contemporary pieces,”
it’s just for me a new tool. I just try to take my interest into it and add
it to my compositions.
Gerd Janson  
I was just about to ask you what attracted you to this more conceptual way of
making music, instead of just having this normal club track that has 16 bars
in the beginning and in the end to mix in and out?
Chloé  
I think it is very inspiring. It is what you were saying earlier, sometimes it
can be repetitive, the DJ life, and I tried to always find something new and
something a bit different to make it more exciting. I’m always searching and
going from one side to another. That was very interesting for me to do that. I did it for
four years. For maybe two and a half years I was 100 percent into this and was
listening to many contemporary tracks, concrete music, starting to go
somewhere else. Then, at one point, I was like, “OK, this is too much, I am a
bit fed up with it. It’s interesting, but OK, I know how it is.” If you DJ,
you DJ a lot and a lot and at one point it is too much, then it is a balance.
Gerd Janson  
And what do you think about the current state of electronic music, if you want
to use that term? You mentioned minimal a few minutes ago, and it is almost
like a curse word nowadays, no one wants to be minimal but everyone is, or something like that.
Chloé  
It’s always more helpful maybe to some people who don’t know what you are
doing to put a tag on it, so I can understand this way. I know, for example,
my album at the shop, there are some shops that didn’t know in which category
to put it. “Shall we put it in folk music or shall we put it in electronic music?” And
finally they put it in electronic music because I am more well-known there and
I use electronic sounds. I don’t know, I can make folk tracks with the help of this
system, an electronic system, so I think it’s a bit boring sometimes. People like to
always tag like this but I believe if people are interested in your music,
they know what you are doing anyway.
Gerd Janson  
You wouldn’t describe your music as minimal then?
Chloé  
It can be minimal, but not only. Sometimes, the more minimal it is, the more
house you want to play, and you make people dance and so in one sense I can
play minimal, but you have really nice house tracks that are minimal. It can
be everywhere.
Gerd Janson  
How often does your gender play a role in what you are doing? You started at a
time when it was still a curiosity that a woman is a DJ and they had stupid
terms like “DJane” and stuff like that.
Chloé  
It’s funny because in France we say “DJette.” I didn’t realize until after
because my second name is Jane and I was like, “How did they know?” I think it
is nice in English, in French when you put “-ette” in front of the word it is a
diminutive. So it is diminutive, I am not like fighting to say I want feminine
words for my category, but it is true that at the beginning I was quite
surprised to see how some people were looking as if they were in the zoo. It
was a bit annoying. Of course, we’re in a world where gender is very
important, but it was maybe more difficult ten years ago than how it is today.
There are some women here in the room and I think maybe ten years ago, if you
put the same room, I am not sure there would be the same quantity. I know that
there were a few years ago some girls coming to me saying that, “I started to
DJ because I could see it was possible for me to start to DJ.” On the one hand
I was not understanding it, but on the other I was like, “Oh, this is cool,”
because it gives the idea to some other people first, and other women.
Gerd Janson  
But you do it with your ears and your head and your hands not your private
parts anyway?
Chloé  
That is why I could not understand also.
Gerd Janson  
There was also this thing called The Dysfunctional Family, you and
Ivan Smagghe, that somehow aimed at that
topic?
Chloé  
The Dysfunctional Family, the funny thing about this was this club at Pulp,
there was lots of different styles of music on each day. We liked this idea of
promoting one club and it was many different identities and we think it is the
same in the music. You were saying about minimal, but it is not [about] the
style. OK, you can say you play this style or this style, but it is more about
the personality. We did this compilation called The Dysfunctional Family
because we thought, “OK, let’s do a compilation.” It is not like a real DJ
mix, it is just a continuity of different tracks and they are like pop, folk
tracks in between big electronic tracks and then something else more disco. But it’s just our own vision and it is music we like. We did this cover where
Ivan is shaved and more like a female and it is all about this identity and
gender stuff.
Gerd Janson  
Do you have something from that compilation with you?
Chloé  
It is really different tracks, maybe I have one I have to see. [pause as she searches on computer] 
(music: Jason Edwards – “Codeine / (Tiger Timing Remix)”)
Gerd Janson  
So what track was this?
Chloé  
So this is not the original because I couldn’t find it, but this is Jason
Edwards, he is an American
songwriter so it is usually more folk. But this is a remix of “Tiger
Timing” and it was released on the
label Kill the DJ, the
label we have with Ivan Smagghe and two other people who were working at Pulp.
Gerd Janson  
Why is it called Kill the DJ?
Chloé  
That was first the name of the party at Pulp. It was a time where in general
house music was more house-y, more positive vibes, and we were playing more dark
music and more sounds from Germany. Maybe it was a bit more cold, and a lot of
parties in France were named like, for example, there is still a very big
party called Respect, and I think it was to counterbalance with this kind of
idea to make it a bit different. When we started the party, I think it was a
new generation and a new idea of making parties with a new style of music, new
artists, new ways of promoting music. So maybe that was the general idea.
Gerd Janson  
The other side of the coin then, so to speak, if Respect is more I guess the American
house kind of thing, right?
Chloé  
Actually, yes, it is true that it was a big time for American labels, and
American artists in the ‘90s. And then slowly it geographically changed and it went more
in Europe. It was the beginning of that time, slowly it was changing.
Gerd Janson  
And with your new album now you started to play live, right?
Chloé  
It was a long time I was thinking to play live.
Gerd Janson  
With the guitar?
Chloé  
No, I could not imagine making a live [performance] of 100-percent guitar and
singing. I am a DJ first and I might produce at home and the idea of making a
live [set] with a guitar in front of people, and being in front totally, that
was totally the other side. Maybe it was too new, maybe it was not the whole
idea of what I was making. As I was saying before, my music is more, for
example, if I use my voice it’s really mixed with the whole instrument. I am
more an instrument so it took me a while to make a live [set] for this reason
because I couldn’t really see an example of someone typical, who isn’t really
in the DJ and live, making a totally different style of music. I wanted
to find an in-between, so I finally found an in-between and I took some sounds
from tracks I already did, and I played them on some beats, but it’s more slow
than my DJ sets and upper than my album, so it’s a real in between.
Gerd Janson  
What is your favorite way of doing it then? You also said once that you
started different and changed it later.
Chloé  
When I did my first live [performance], I was in front of my computer. It was
not sequenced, but I knew what I was going to play and at what moment it was
going to happen. I really prepared it, you know when you are really stressed
you really prepare carefully to make sure nothing is lost and you don’t have
to think too much when you play live. So the first live [set] I did like this.
For me, it was really new because it was really more downtempo and the people
were not dancing as when I play as a DJ, so the feeling with the people, the
perception of the people, was very different. But I did not like being with a laptop like
that and knowing exactly what I was playing, so I really had to rethink my
live [set] and so I really understood how my live [set] was going to be.
Suddenly, I realized the mixer had to be in front of me, like when I DJ, and
the computer on another side and then I started to bring some other stuff, like
a Roland 707 for the beats. I
have an effects machine for all kinds of delays, I have the Kaoss
Pad 2 for all types of effects
and a few synthesizers and other stuff like this, and now it is much more fun.
So I changed everything in my computer and I am more free to play whatever I
want and take more risks like when I DJ, because when I DJ I don’t know exactly what
I’m going to play. I feel much better that way with just a few things on my
computer. I feel better like that.
Gerd Janson
So it’s really live then.
Chloé
It’s more live but still it’s not an
instrument I am using, so I have to prepare sounds before anyway. I can loop voices and use my voice
as an instrument, for example. My Kaoss Pad 2, if I play with my voice and I
use my Kaoss Pad and it makes a sound and according to how I do it on my
microphone, the sound changes a bit and it makes new sounds, so yeah, it’s quite
interesting when you’re performing live. It is more exciting than just pushing
play.
Gerd Janson  
I would like to open it out now for a few questions. If you have any, that is...
Audience Member 
How do you lay out your live set mainly? Is it in
Ableton?
Chloé  
Yes, I use Ableton Live. I don’t use the side where you can arrange, I use the
side with the clips. So, for example, on one track I have only two levels where
it can work together, but then I can change from one clip to another clip to
another clip, and this is more exciting I think than just doing all these
things exactly, because it can be very different from one experience to
another. Even if I think before how I will start, it is only when you are here
can you know what you are trying. For the room and the atmosphere. For example, this weekend I was playing at a
festival, this is the first year I performed live but I played at a few
festivals and I have to say it was very stressful because I don’t play so many
live sets. For example, this weekend I played in France at a festival
called N.A.M.E., a festival in the
North of France. The next day I played in the South of France and the two atmospheres were
totally different, it was really different. In the North I felt I had to play
more dubby, more bass, not too much high-frequency, and in the South it was
the opposite, I felt I could play more high frequencies. So that was funny, you know?
Audience Member 
You said you were the resident at this club for eight years. Do you ever have
this problem like the same audience, are you having problems with this, wasn’t
it boring sometimes?
Chloé  
You mean when I was playing there? I think it was at the beginning a bit
boring in a way, really at the beginning, because the people did not know your
music, didn’t like this style, didn’t like you so much because you were
cutting what they were wanting. So in the beginning it was a bit hard, I have
to say, but at the same time it was a good education to see how the people
like your music. Of course, in the beginning there was some people coming and
yelling at me like, “What are you doing? Go away, I want the normal DJ.” So this is
a good education because now wherever I go, if something like that happens, and
thank god it does not happen any more, but it can, then in a way I don’t care. You take
care of your sensibility. It’s very important not to care too much because it
can interfere with your artistic expression.
Audience Member 
You said you are performing very often three times a week so how do you sort
it out with your selection? Do you get bored of your selections? How do you
sort it out?
Chloé  
I never play the same set from one party to another. I am trying not to play
the same set anyway because it can be very different from one club to another,
that’s what I was saying. For example, this weekend, you can only know what
you’re playing just at the time you are entering the club, the time the club
is open. Usually, I go to the same clubs and I know what kind of atmosphere it
is going to be but never play the same set. I think it is more exciting
anyway, even for the people.
Gerd Janson  
Any more questions? Then I will say thank you very much, Chloé.
