As one of the first DJs to make it onto the radio, Kool DJ Red Alert was there when hip-hop history began. In this talk at the 2005 Red Bull Music Academy in Seattle, Red takes us through the days when it was a local phenomenon, confined to a few blocks in the South Bronx. He talks about Kool Herc, Afrika Bambaataa, Grandmaster Flash and the other legends who laid down the template. We hear about the records that rocked the block parties, the equipment that was used to blow up the sound, the local stars who thrilled the streets and how hip-hop was pimped from day one by a pizza parlour boy who cribbed rhymes from his friend to make the first record.
Monk One 
Here we go again and right now it is my extreme pleasure to welcome to the
sofa a real legend in music and someone who has influenced my tastes in a big
way, Mr Red Alert.
[applause]
DJ Red Alert 
Peace everybody.
Monk One 
Just to give you some background, take it back to the mid-/late-'80s, there used to be two main radio stations in New York, WBLS and Kiss FM. And Friday
and Saturday nights there were some amazing landmark radio shows that were going on there.
Live DJing, hearing records cut up on air, hearing special rhymes and skits
that were made specifically for those shows. And on Kiss FM you had Kool DJ Red
Alert and on WBLS you had Marley Marl.
These shows were so important to us and so hot in New York City that I used to have a
tape in and you could hear on all my tapes, when there was a commercial break
on Red’s show, I used to tune the radio into WBLS and try to catch a bit of
Mister Magic’s show and then tune it back down, because you didn’t want to miss a second because there was always something happening. It really set a high standard for what radio could be about for me. I had the chance to see Red play, DJed with him several times. He is always dropping knowledge, whether it’s in the records he plays or stories from back then. So, if you have an interest in how hip-hop started or what it’s really all about,
then you’ll be interested in what he has to say. I’d like to start by taking it back to where you’re from, the Bronx, and let people know about that.
DJ Red Alert 
First, I was born in Antigua in the West Indies. I came over as a baby, I was raised by my grandparents, they’re from Antigua on my mother’s side, and I grew up in
Harlem, in a project which is now called Ralph J Rangle Houses and used to be called Colonial Projects, right behind the Polo Grounds. I have no shame to tell you far back it goes. At the time I was a tot, the Polo Grounds was a baseball field, originally the home of the New York Giants, then they moved
out to San Francisco and that was when they formed the New York Mets. When I
was a tyke, my grandfather, God bless him, used to take me up onto the roof of the projects and we’d look straight down and watch the New York Mets. 
Coming up with my grandparents, in the house was the sounds of calypso, soca, and the American music was Motown, soul classics and some pop hits, like The Beatles, Rolling Stones, The Beach Boys. 
I did not really acknowledge the outskirts of everything else until I got into junior high school, that’s when I got aware of everything
else that was going on. When you are raised in a Caribbean household, you don’t know the difference. When I started having friends, they’d come over to my grandparents’ house and hear the music they were playing, and they’d say: “Your grandmother's from Jamaica?” “What're you talking about? My grandmother's from here.” I didn’t understand, they thought it was funny. When they saw the food we were eating, they’d say: “Y’all eat Jamaican food.” “No, food is food.” You start understanding later on. 
After junior high school I went to school in the Bronx, I went to Dewitt Clinton High School, which is where I started listening to a lot of other things. During that time there
were the gangs going on in the streets: the Black Spades, the Savage Nomads, Savage Skulls... the list is long. And me going to Dewitt Clinton, it was an all-boys school. You can imagine a school of 3/4.000
with nothing but fellows, and you average about seven or eight gangs in there.
Monk One 
And you’re talking about the mid-'70s?
DJ Red Alert 
I’m talking about the early '70s. Of all the people who I had in my class...
I’ll give you a story. First day coming in, there was some books hanging on
the edge. I walked past and knocked the books over. The guy said: “Yo, pick up
the books.” I just kept walking on, paid him no mind. Me, big, skinny, snotty
red afro kid. “Ey, yo man, pick up my books.” I said: “I ain’t picking up
shit.” The guy stood up, I saw his full size, he must have been 6’ 6”. I said:
“Oh shit!” One thing I learned, if somebody’s bigger than you, you’ve got to
pick up stuff. I managed to get out, because some of the classrooms had two doors, so I got out the other side. The word got around through some of the kids in the neighborhood, and three periods later we caught up with each
other. He looked at me and started laughing. He said: “I don’t want to fight
you, you’ve got a lot of heart. You know who I am?” “I don’t know who you are.” “They call me Blood. Where you from?” I said: “I’m from Harlem.” He said: “No wonder.” Me and him became good friends. If anybody’s familiar with boxing, there’s a guy called Mitch Green who always got into it with Mike Tyson, that was the guy who was the leader of the Black
Pearls, I got into it with him. 
Later on I got to know about other people. Before I got into music I was known for playing ball, so I got to know everybody else in the school. I learned about some of these other individuals that was living in parts of the Bronx. Some of them came from Bronx River, my man Tony Rome and a couple of others,
they used to always tell me about where they were from. I’d say: “What is it
about Bronx River?” They’d say: “Man, you don’t know.” During my time in school there
they’d tell me about these parties up in the Bronx. “You need to come to the
jam.” That’s what they’d call them. So the first time I went it was in the
Bronx on Jerome Avenue, a broken down area in a condemned building with just a
couple of lights. I was a little apprehensive, but I saw a couple of people
hanging in the hallway section, the staircase, so I thought maybe it’s alright
because people are hanging like it ain’t nothing. I get to the door, they ask
for $3, walked in there, saw a whole bunch of people that wasn’t dressed up, being
just as they are, a whole different kind of awareness. I kept walking straight
to the back, ran into this gentleman, a big husky guy that was DJing. 
I’ll
never forget, his set-up was like this: he had a Shure PA system, Shure PA
systems at that time were powerful to us. He had a Sony mic-mixer, to which he
had two Pioneer PL
15 turntables. He had
it all set up, and the way he was playing records was different to other
places, or the radio. I thought, “What’s he doing?” I didn’t think about the
party, I just stood there all night watching what he was doing. That gentleman
goes by the name of Kool Herc and I started listening to what he was playing,
and while he was DJing there was a gentleman by the side on the mic called
Coke La Rock, who I always consider the very
first MC. He kept on saying, time after time: “You rock and you don’t stop,”
“My mellow,” and there was various people, he kept shouting their names out.
Looking to the middle of the dancefloor I saw a lot of fellows doing this kind
of footwork that later on was known as breakdancing. I was just amazed by the
whole theory of what they’re playing, how they’re dancing, the whole
liveliness of how everybody was. And this is just up in the Bronx, so I was
going to school up there, bumping into people like Blood and people from Bronx
River who introduced me to that sound.
Monk One 
What year was this?
DJ Red Alert 
This was about 1973, then I just kept regularly going to all his parties. The first was
at a place called the Twilight Zone, next was the Hevalo, next was the
Executive Playhouse. Meanwhile he was always doing things up in the Bronx at
the high school or outdoors. Now at this time, it wasn’t no big advertisement,
it was just word of mouth. Now Herc was from Kingston, Jamaica, and he brought
over a style they call “toasting and dubbing,” which became known as rapping
and mixing. So as he perfected that and developed a following, everybody was
coming from all over the Bronx and parts of Harlem. That’s what influenced me
more and more. Then another thing I tried to do, being a little sneaky guy,
was get behind the ropes and see what’s back there. But he’d be: ”Get your ass
back out.”
Monk One 
Yeah, Herc’s a big guy. That’s where he got his name from, Hercules.
DJ Red Alert 
Hercules, because he’s a big strong guy and he shortened it to Herc.
Monk One 
Can you remember from that time what records he was playing?
DJ Red Alert 
Various records I got to know later on were “The Mexican” by Babe Ruth, “It’s
Just Begun” by the Jimmy Castor
Bunch, “Do What You Gotta Do” by
Collage, “Shaft In Africa” from
the soundtrack of the movie, “Listen To
Me” by Baby Huey, “Get Into
Something” by the Isley Brothers.
It was just a host of records he’d put a twist into, right along with the commercialised records you’d hear on the radio. Even when he’d play the commercial records he’d still add a twist because he’d blend from one into another.
Monk One 
Now, how was what he was doing different from DJ Flowers or some of the disco
DJs like Pete DJ Jones?
DJ Red Alert 
Usually, some of the DJs in the clubs in midtown Manhattan would play the whole
records, but he would just play the “get down” part, which later on was known
as the breakbeats. But we used to call it “the get down” because it was time
to get into the groove of how it sounded, whether it was four bars or eight
bars. Herc was not a person to go from one record to another on time, but it
was just the fact you’d know he would play that and he was ready to go for it.
Then he had DJs that he hired that were under him called Timmy Tim and the original
DJ Clark Kent and they were the ones who would learn how to time the record
from one to another. 
At the same time, I was going to the parties there were a whole bunch
of other guys there who I didn’t know, but would grow to know later, such as
Flash, Mean Gene who was the brother of Grandwizard
Theodore,
Grandmaster Caz, they was the offspring, the next generation of DJs in the
Bronx. So they start becoming DJs in the Bronx, you start going to all their
parties and they had certain locations throughout the Bronx.
Monk One 
And your cousin Jazzy Jay was also going to these jams at the time?
DJ Red Alert 
No, this is how it happened: I was going to the jams and I was being inspired.
Then, when I started working I’d go to the store called Discomat, real big at
the time, and spend all my money on records. Even though I didn’t have no set
yet, I was just collecting the records. Later on I saved up and bought a set,
Technics 1800's
with a Clubman 1-1 mixer. I had it set up with my boxspring and mattress on the floor, put
my crates right in front of it and my set right on top of it. I'd have my crates
of records right around in front of the bed, put my set in front of me and
started DJing. 
I learned how to DJ by watching how people were catching certain parts of the record. I’d watch them and go home, before I even got my set, I’d
have my little Gerard turntable and I used to put my ear to it and listen for
the breaks. After I learned that my cousin was coming around, he’d say, “Yo
man, what’s this you’re doing?” I’d say, “I’m learning how to DJ.” So I’d show
him the basics. At the time he was staying in Manhattan, then he moved to the
Bronx River projects, he was getting more and more into DJing and for his
first set he’d use Technics
SL-23s and a little
Clubman mixer. 
Now as he started DJing, someone put the word to a guy called,
rest in peace, Disco King Mario
who came from another section of the Bronx. “Yo, this guy called Jazzy, you
better check him out.” Disco Mario was known to have a great soundsystem, but
he didn’t have turntables or records, very few records, but he was very
competitive to the next man I’ll talk about later on. Here it is. He got to
hear about my cousin Jazzy: “You want to get down with me? I’ll put you on.”
He put him on, had him working, but he was jerking him because he wasn’t paying
him. He would get him exposure. Then the next guy I’m talking about said:
“Who’s this little youth that’s working with Mario?” “Yo, that’s that kid that
just moved into the projects.” “What’s he doing over there? He’s supposed to
be down with us.” That guy was Afrika
Bambaataa. At
the time he had two DJs before Jazzy, one named Zombo and one named Sinbad.
One of them had fallen out, he wasn’t down with Bam no more and that’s when he
approached my cousin. “You don’t need to be down with them, you’re from the
Bronx River projects.” Jazzy kept talking to him about me, “Put my cousin
down.” “Who’s your cousin?” “My cousin from over in Manhattan.” So then, when
the next DJ fell out he brought me in, and there you have Afrika Bambaataa,
Jazzy Jay and Red Alert.
Monk One 
Can you give me a breakdown of what it was like to work with them? Who was
selecting the records, who was putting the records on, what were the roles of
people?
DJ Red Alert 
First of all, Bam was a very well respected person up in the Bronx because he
was a warlord in the Black Spades. What he did during his time was learn to
study the African heritage and he went away to study it in Africa and he got more
involved on the musical side. His mother had bought him a system, and he
learned to tie his between his sense of music and his African heritage and
combine. After the gangs he formed a crew called the Organization, which only
lasted about a year, because he still had this wild theory about himself. But
then he wanted to get a more conscious environment so he formed the Zulu
Nation. When he formed the Zulu Nation he had the
b-boys, not only males but also females, he’d call them Shaka Zulu Kings and
Shaka Zulu Queens, and they’d be out there breakdancing and following the sounds of Bam like he’s the pied
piper. That’s how the Zulu Nation started being formed and everybody wanted to
join in. But he was letting people into knowledge and heritage and giving
people information about the Zulu nation.
Monk One 
So he was eliminating the negative aspects of the gangs and emphasising the
positivity and the culture.
DJ Red Alert 
He turned everything around, said: “I’m tired of all the negativity, I want to
show also that there’s a side where we don’t have to downgrade ourselves, we
can uplift ourselves and we can do it through music.” Bam was a person who, if
he liked you, he’d put you right on. When it was us three as his DJs he had ten MCs: Mr
Biggs, Pow Wow, MC Globe, Lisa Lee, Hutch-Hutch, Ice Ice, Master Ice, Master
Bee, Charlie Rock and I forgot the last person’s name. Bam
was known as the master of records because he’d come out with various sounds
that no one can describe. He would dig deep into different records, his
collection is crazy to this day.
Monk One 
He wasn’t just sticking with James Brown?
DJ Red Alert 
He’d touch on everything, he’d dig so deep. And the thing about it, to this
day my cousin can tell you, if he was to pull certain records, we might not
know these records, but we know where to put the needle at, because there was
a way he had the record formed that we just knew where it was. He’d pull this
record and say, “I want you to put this on next,” and we would just put our mind
to it and play it.
Monk One 
So Bam would have his crates of records.
DJ Red Alert 
15 crates of records of all different sounds.
Monk One 
And he would select.
DJ Red Alert 
It’s not for us to select, he’d select. Whatever he’d select is what the MC
has to be ready to recite over. He’s like the general, if he tells you to go,
you go, if he tells you this is what you play, you play.
Monk One 
Did he have the labels blacked out at that time?
DJ Red Alert 
Either blacked out or he would do what Herc did, soak the labels off and
switch them. They could be two different records. He’d learn how to slide it
off and put it on another record, just in case you were to go past and see
that label, “OK, I know what that record is.” You go to the store and buy the
record, you got the wrong record, he fooled you. Bam did the same thing, but
then he blacked them out with his own records or had his own style. But me and
Jay knew what it was.
Monk One 
So for someone who might not know, why was he doing that?
DJ Red Alert 
Because at that time, at the beginning of the hip-hop era, every DJ was
recognized for certain records. Flash was recognized for certain records, Bam
was recognized for certain records, Theodore was recognized for certain
records. Everybody had an identity of their sound and his style, but Bam beat
everybody up because he had a wider selection of records. That's why he was the “master of records.”
Monk One 
What’s the difference between Bam and Herc in terms of the styles they play?
DJ Red Alert 
Herc, once again, is the person who started the whole set. He’s the beginner,
and not only that, he had a well respected soundsystem. If you had a
McIntosh
amp, you earned respect because at that time it was hard to get a McIntosh,
who had that kind of money?
Monk One 
That’s not the Macintosh computer, McIntosh amplifier.
DJ Red Alert 
The amplifier, yeah, in the street you gained respect if you’ve got a Mac, you
had a mean soundsystem. We learned how to build the soundsystem through the
credibility of my cousin Jay because as he went to high school he learned to
take up carpentry and he built speakers. Jay built speakers that were bigger
than him, he used double scoops. And we, with our devilish ways, went
downtown and at that time in the train system they had bullhorns, we used to
steal the bullhorns, take them home, soak them, clean them, and we used the
horns, and then find where we could get little tweeters, and built tweeter
boxes. So we did everything from scratch. And then the difference is between
Herc and Bam, Herc is the beginner, then Bam came, perfected it and took it to
another level. It’s like, everybody knows about Dr. J, but here comes Michael
Jordan taking it to another level.
Monk One 
So can you give us some examples of records that Bam came up on that were far
outside the genre?
DJ Red Alert 
He came up with “Impeach The
President”,
“Last Night Changed It All” by
Esther Williams, this record called “On The Top”.
Monk One 
He would reach into rock, into European records...
DJ Red Alert 
He would reach into all different genres of music. One that happened, then a couple of years later
the recording field came in, and when the recording field came in a lot of
independent labels would start putting out records.
Enjoy under Mr. Bobby
Robinson, Mr
Peter Brown, I forgot his label, but he put out people like Spoonie
Gee and Willie Wood.
Monk One 
Sound Of New York.
DJ Red Alert 
Yes, Sound Of New York. By that time, Paul
Winley stepped to Bambaataa
and said: “I want to make a record.” And that’s when he put out Zulu Throwdown
and that was the Soulsonic Force, which was Lisa Lee, Ikey C, Chubby Chub and
Ice Ice.
Monk One 
And that was ’79?
DJ Red Alert 
’79 to ’80.
Monk One 
The gentlemen you mentioned, Bobby Robinson, Paul Winley and Peter Brown,
Patrick Adams, they were
entrepreneurs in Harlem who had experimented with lots of different musical
styles over the years. What was the turning point because rapping had never been
on a record. It was just in the party.
DJ Red Alert 
I’ve got to give respect for every one of them individuals you just mentioned, because they
felt something that nobody else felt. They were the trendsetters, they were
willing to take a chance as they independently saw how the people were acting
in the street. Another thing, we used to tape all the parties and
they were popular circulating around the 'hood in Harlem and the Bronx. These
tapes were being sold like crazy, I used to make a lot of money off these
tapes because I used to tape every Zulu Nation party. And I guess that caught
their ears, because they said: “Let’s get these people who are making these
tapes and get them in the studio.” So that’s what they did.
Monk One
What was the progression from originally hearing: “Rock, rock y’all,” “Yes, yes
y’all,” and an MC for a DJ in the party to an actual MC reciting rhymes and
routines? Who were the people taking it beyond that?
DJ Red Alert 
It had to be people such as Melle
Mel and his brother Kid
Creole, they started
becoming storytellers, having routines. Then you had other people come along
such as Grandmaster Caz, who was known as Casanova
Fly at the time, and guys like Whipper Whip and Donald Rock, they were known
as Salt and Pepper because one was light-skinned and one was dark-skinned.
They was always doing the storytelling, so even though you always had the:
“Yes, yes y’all, rocking to the beat,” they took it to another standard. That
was growing up in the Bronx, there were other people growing up in Manhattan
such as the Treacherous
Three,
Kool Moe Dee,
LA Sunshine and Special K right along with Spoonie Gee. They were always
telling stories, so they were taking it to another level as far as MCing was
concerned.
Monk One 
Now, [for] a lot of people outside that community, the first record with rapping on
it they heard was the Sugarhill Gang.
DJ Red Alert 
Well, you could say that it was, but not really. Really, it was really a combination of the two. It was “King Tut
III” by the Fatback Band and a little bit of rapping on this record called “Must Be The
Music” by Secret Weapon. I guess between the two, people still look at that as more
dance/disco records, it wasn’t straight up, actual rap. But it so happened that Big
Bank Hank, who was manager of the Cold Crush
Brothers, had a tape of
their music at a job he was working at in a pizza parlour in New Jersey.
Either Sylvia Robinson or someone affiliated with her heard the tape and said: “Is that
you?”, and he said: “Yeah,” lying. But it was really his group. They said: “I
want you to go ahead, I’m forming this group, you want to be in it?” So he
said to Caz: “Can you get me some rhymes?” He pulled out his book of
literature and said: “Pick whatever you want.” Caz being Caz, in his street
mind he’s thinking, “You’re going to look out for us because you’re our
manager.”
Monk One 
So the manager of the group had the tape he was listening to at his part time
job in the pizza place. Sylvia Robinson, or someone associated with her, came
in and said: “That’s good, I want to put you on my label Sugar
Hill.”
DJ Red Alert 
That’s right.
Monk One: 
And the rhymes that Big Bank Hank used in “Rapper’s Delight” were taken from
Grandmaster Caz, and if you actually listen to the record he says: “I’m the
c-a-s-a-n-o-v-a the rest is f-l-y”, and that’s Casanova Fly, which is Caz’s
name.
DJ Red Alert 
That’s his official name because Caz was known as a DJ before he was an MC. So
we move on and progressed more and more with rap records coming along on
different independent labels. We had moved from parties in the Bronx and Long Island,
we’re doing Jersey, parts of Connecticut, we thought it was big because we
were moving around, not only in the tri-state area. Bam had come across two
individuals, one by the name of Tom Silverman and
another by the name of Rizzi Blue. Tom Silverman was of course the CEO of
Tommy Boy, Rizzi Blue was a punk rock promoter, they both invited him to the
downtown side. Otherwise Tom Silverman invited him to the recording side,
Rizzi Blue invited him to the club side, so that’s when we started being open
to another different audience. We started falling in with punk rock, new wave,
hip-hop, all under one roof. So imagine, we’re doing our thing jamming and
there’s these people with this crazy mohawk. We look at them as weird and
crazy, but still we learned to fit in. 
We came across various artists at that
time like Nina Hagen, Devo, Talking Heads, Men At Work, we were playing clubs
like Negril, Danceteria. During that time from Negril to Danceteria, that was
when Tom Silverman came and said: “Pull out a couple of MCs to form a group
and make a record.” Now on the side of the Soulsonic Force, of these ten MCs,
three of them were in a group that me and my cousin Jazzy [Jay] had. First we
were called the Jazzy 3, then we re-formed as the Jazzy 5. We picked them
first because they had a little style of their own and they made a record
called “Jazzy Sensation”.
Monk One 
Gwen McCrae...
DJ Red Alert 
Right. So by the time we were getting ready to come out at the Danceteria, we
were getting ready to make our next move. Tom had joined Bam with Arthur
Baker and John, and
that was the one that opened the door for all of us, “Planet
Rock”. That was in ’82, and by
the time we got to the Roxy, that was our introduction to the rest of the
world.
Monk One: 
Now, a lot of people might not realize what Red was talking about, moving
downtown. There wasn’t a lot of interaction between the uptown and downtown
scenes.
DJ Red Alert 
No, there wasn’t because the downtown scene was just coming to the end of the
disco era. As it was coming to the end of the disco era, the new wave and punk rock was coming
in, and it was coming in very heavy. But they only had a taste of the hip-hop
sound. People like Fab Five Freddy, who introduced that to Blondie, and you
saw how that record took off. And various others, so this was like an open door for
us to come and show our skills.
Monk One 
Fab Five Freddy, who sort of was the person who moved between the two scenes pretty easily, he introduced the
downtown people to what was going on in the Bronx and in Harlem. As a result of that you
had records like “Rapture” by
Blondie and you can hear Debbie Harry do her little imitation.
DJ Red Alert 
It became like nationally known, worldwide.
Monk One 
By coming downtown to a club like Negril, which was kind of a reggae club.
DJ Red Alert 
It was a reggae club, it used to be known as Bob Marley’s club. That was our
introduction coming down there. I think it was on 13th Street and 2nd Ave.
Monk One 
That’s right, and Danceteria was very much a new wave and punk club. That was
where you could see anything and everything.
DJ Red Alert 
Oh man! That was when I started acknowledging and experiencing things I had
never seen in my life as far as people are concerned. It definitely came to if
it was the same sex, I was scared to go to the bathroom at one point.
Monk One 
But musically things just exploded as far as the different types of music that
everyone was being exposed to.
DJ Red Alert 
And vice versa.
Monk One 
You had a group like Kraftwerk that would become very influential in the sound
of “Planet Rock”.
DJ Red Alert 
Absolutely. Bam had a little twist of Kraftwerk, a little bit of funk, and he
gave the ideas to Arthur Baker and John Robie to go to the studio and put it
all together and he called it electro-funk. We had no idea that that record
was really going to touch the world. If you think about it, behind that one
record, how many records that came out, whether it was dance or what, had that
electro sound? And that was going on for two or three years.
Monk One 
There are people to this day who are mentioning how important “Planet Rock”
was to everything that came afterwards.
DJ Red Alert 
Then you had a twist to it when you went far South and they started adding
more bottom to it and it became the bass music. But the official substance of
it was the “Planet Rock”, that’s what it was.
Monk One 
So how did things move forward as you went into the mid-'80s?
DJ Red Alert 
During that time as we went forward from the Danceteria to the Roxy, we
started building up at the Roxy so much, the audiences were getting bigger and
bigger. The Roxy was known as a skating ring, a well-known rollerskating ring,
for years and years. But it just got so popular on a Friday, we were averaging
about 3.500 people on a Friday night. Again, there wasn’t no major
advertisement, not on radio. It was the Village Voice or just the downtown
scene with the flyers and stuff. But it was like a melting pot, you had all
different nationalities coming together and that’s where we started learning
to play everything: R&B, punk rock, new wave, hip-hop, rock, alternative,
Caribbean, dance. We just learned to play everything together. Not only that,
we started seeing a lot of celebrities coming like it was the norm. What was
her name that was married to Mick Jagger? Bianca, she was there all the time,
Rick James was there all the time. To me, it was the birth for people like Madonna,
who was coming in at that time. It was the place where DST got to meet
Herbie Hancock. Where later on, they made...
Monk One 
“Rockit”.
DJ Red Alert 
They were just there. During that time we had a radio show on an independent
station, on WBL 105.9, where people always feel that was where hip-hop radio
was created because you had Mister Magic playing it for the first time back in
1980. We had a show on there called Zulu Beats and the person who was the
spearhead was Afrika Islam, who was the Son Of Bambaataa, not the biological
son but we used to call him the Son Of Bambaataa. I used to come down there
all the time because everybody knew me for having all the tapes of the parties
and I’d bring them down and he’d play them. Islam was on top of his game, he
was one of the baddest. 
A little later on, there were some people coming from the radio station, 98.7 Kiss FM, they were hearing so much about The Roxy they came down, a guy by the name of Barry Mayo who was the programme director at the time, he
said, “We have interests in forming a mix show with some hip-hop in it.”
Already WBLS had introduced Mister Magic over there in ’82 with his show Mister Magic Rap
Attack. So Kiss FM, who are their competitors, wanted a mix show with some hip-hop involvement, and they wanted Islam. Islam didn’t show up to a couple of
appointments, so they came to Bam and said: “Who’s the next person you have in
mind?” My cousin Jazzy, he was the next person in line. Jazzy did it for a
couple of months. He didn’t get paid for none the mixes, but he gained great
exposure for the parties and the studios. Jazzy got fed up and said: “I don’t
want to do it anymore.” Because he wasn’t getting paid. You know the mentality
of the streets, you’re supposed to get yours right off the top. So they came
to Bam: “Who’s the next person you’ve got in mind?” “Well, we’ve got this guy
Red Alert.” They brought me in October of ’83 and I did it for a few months
without pay. 
Then ’84 I got my first cheque, which wasn’t much, but at that
time I was on every other week because the other week they used to have on
Shep Pettibone and Tony Humphries. And
they were known for the dance music and especially Tony Humphries for the
house music. So I was on every other week. Then every time I only got paid $100, but
look at all the exposure I got. Then after seven months after I got on, then they brought in Chuck Chillout and
they alternate me and him back and forth on Saturdays. And we used to be on
from 11 to 2. Another group they had on was Latin Rascals. I think
they came in before Chuck Chillout. But they were known for their style with
the editing, they were getting good deals in production.
Monk One 
So they were featuring different styles at that point. I guess around ’85/6
there was a breakthrough because you had the first samplers and people were
able to make their own music without drum machines. Who were some of the first
people you heard doing that stuff?
DJ Red Alert 
I definitely have to state, god bless the dead, Scott La
Rock, because the way he sampled
the bits and pieces of James Brown for the record “South Bronx,” and I’ll never
forget the first time I heard it when he brought it to the club I used to play at called Latin
Quarters. They were pissed off with the situation with Mister Magic. They were
behind a group called 23:16 [ed. note: 12:41], a record called “Success Is The
Word” that was on Sleeping
Bag.
Monk One 
This is KRS' and Scott La
Rock, their first group.
DJ Red Alert 
And Mister Magic at the time had a big reputation for dissing everybody, he
even dissed me on the radio, he would diss everybody. He thought he could do
that. When he dissed them they were pissed, because it was so bad the group
were even dropped off the label. So when they came across this group of people
who had Rock Candy Records they formed Boogie Down Productions. When they
heard this record by MC Shan, who was on Marley Marl’s label, who was part of
Mister Magic’s crew, called “The Bridge”, they thought, 'OK, we’ll do an
answer to it'. That was another thing that came out of the era, the answer
records, which began with Roxanne so they did an answer, which was “South Bronx.” The first night I heard it, there was this big guy who used to DJ at Latin
Quarters every Tuesday called Raoul. Scott gave it to Raoul on the acetate, he
played it, oh my God, everybody's going crazy. He took it off, played it
again, crazy. After two plays of the acetate Scott took it off and gave it to
me, said: “That’s for you to play on the radio.” That was one of the first
sample records I listened to.
Monk One 
And that, of course, sampled James Brown and James Brown at that time really became the
guy to sample.
DJ Red Alert 
He’s got to be the most sampled person ever. At that same time Marley was
doing a lot of sampling of bits and pieces too. A lot of people don’t know
Marley was doing his production in his room where he lived in the Queensbridge
projects. Sampling became so popular everybody jumped on board instead of using the drum machine. Because, you know, the drum machine went through so many different theories. People used it so clever from the era of “Planet Rock” through to where it became so simple with Run DMC, they didn’t add to much to it, it was just drums. People were getting
tired so they wanted to do something different and that’s when the sampling came in.
Monk One 
And what were some of the big records you were playing back at that time? The show had
evolved from a little bit of hip-hop to all hip-hop.
DJ Red Alert 
Yeah because, once again, it was a mix show where they wanted to be diverse with R&B, dance and
hip-hop. But the hip-hop started coming in more and more strongly. As it came
stronger it became more hip-hop, fewer R&B and dance. I was still perfecting R&B, but hip-hop became more potent. Me and Chuck used to
alternate, we used to be on 11 to 2, they used to have us on reel-to-reel,
they didn’t have us on live. The reason why they moved from us 11 to 2 down to 9 to 12,
down to prime time was because they heard our tapes and realised we weren’t into
editing and splicing. They said, “How come you ain’t into editing and
splicing?” We said, “This is what the streets feel. The same way you hear on
the radio, this is what we play in the club. If they don’t hear you play that
way, they figure you for a phony. So you learn how to play straight out.” So
that’s when they moved us down to and put Chuck on Friday and me on Saturday,
9 to 12. During that time the war between the radio was starting to take
place. We were on the same time as Magic and we were giving him hell, but it
was healthy. Even then I skipped over something. During the “Roxanne, Roxanne”
era, which UTFO started the craze, Shante, who’s affiliated with Marley, did
the answer. Then Sparky D did the answer to Shante, Sparky D did “Sparky’s Turn”. They were all affiliated
with Russell Simmons and Rush Productions. I used to hang out at Russell’s
office at the early stage. She met me and said, “You want to be my DJ?” “OK.”
There was always a rivalry going on somewhat because I represented for her, Marley
represented for Shante. We were on the road all the time doing shows. It was
crazy because even though we were going at each other’s throat, we looked out
for each other on the road regardless of whatever was going on. In fact Fly
Ty, their road manager, was my roommate. It’s good to see even to this day
Sparky and Shante are great friends. Me and Marley, we worked at the same
radio station and we laughed about how people tried to compare us because we
were so close.
Monk One 
It’s really true that back in those days it was serious.
DJ Red Alert 
Years later they see how me and KRS-One got along with Shan and Magic and did
a Sprite commercial. So even though we were at each other, look how it turned
out later on.
Monk One 
And later on around ’86/'7, your nephews got involved.
DJ Red Alert 
No, they got involved around the late '80s. When you talk about ’86/7, I was
doing a club called Union Square. The first set of people, in the early '80s
you had the Run DMC, Whodini, LL Cool J The Fat Boys. When you get into ’86/7, now here come Eric B & Rakim, Boogie Down Productions, Salt ‘N’ Pepa, Moe Dee as a solo artist and various
others. And that’s when I started DJing over at Latin Quarters and getting
more involved with Boogie Down Productions and building relations with people such as Mark 45
King, that’s my man
through thick and thin, and building my criteria. What came in was the visual
aspect, the videos, and all those things that meant I learnt how to market
myself, build my self up to another standard. Now when it came to the late
'80s that’s when my nephew, he’d been asking me for the longest, “Yo, me and
my group want to do our record.” So after they graduated I said, “Let me give
you a shot.” So my man Tony D who was a producer and DJ of a group called Bad
Boys, who had a record called Inspector Gadget, he was always saying:
“Whenever you have a group, let me know when you’re ready.” So I took them
over to Tony D. The first record they did was a tune called “The Breaks”,
which was a sample of the b-side to “Do The Funky Chicken” by Rufus Thomas, “Do You
Wanna See It?”. So they were going to use that, but they went ahead and wrote
this other song, with a slogan, which was always used in my family, one my
brother was always saying. Any time he’d see a female he’d say, “Yeah, yeah,
yeah, she want my Jim Browski, she want my Jim Browski.” So my nephew Mike Gee
and Shazam, later on known as Afrika, put their heads together and made “Jim
Browski.” That opened the door for them as the Jungle Brothers.
Monk One 
That was their first record, “Jungle Brothers featuring DJ Red Alert”. You were
in on the recording of that?
DJ Red Alert 
Yeah, they had me doing all the segues, “Word up!”, all the stuff like that.
Monk One 
And I think on the b-side of that they were cutting up “Impeach The President”.
DJ Red Alert 
“Bragging & Boasting”, yeah, that was Sammy D on the cut.
Monk One 
At that point you had seen hip-hop, rap music progress from being something
almost unheard of outside that small community uptown. It moved downtown, then
it moved to the tri-state area, then all of a sudden there were videos being
made, MTV happened around that time, people needed videos and you were getting
the chance to travel across the country.
DJ Red Alert 
The first time I travelled across the country was in ’85. I went overseas with
Bam, me, Ikey C, Lisa Lee, graffiti artist by the name of Brim and the Dynamic
Breakers. So we went over there and I was amazed because I had no idea. A lot
of the kids were running up asking for autographs. How the heck did they know
who I am? I learned that a lot of people would tape me off the radio, bring it
over to London and in London pirate radio was popular. People used to make
their own radio stations, transmit between various blocks in their local
areas. They would play the entire show, commercials and everything. I
discovered that wherever I travelled. People would tape the show, go into the
service, go and see their family, and the tapes would travel. People would
come up and say, “I make money off you.” “How you make money off me?” “Yo man,
I’m in school, I have to learn how to make money. I tape you off the radio,
make a copy and sell it.” I couldn’t be mad because later on people would hire
me to do school gigs, homecomings, so instead of paying for your own
promotion, they do it for you. 
So when you look at that and how people
acknowledge you overseas, to the point where you become involved in different
groups and learn how to market yourself in the visual and the audio, you just
enhance the whole thing. But the last thing, honestly, that was on my mind was the
money. The money was good, the money wasn’t great, but it was good. But when you’re
so much involved with something you enjoy doing you just keep rolling. That’s
what I think for a lot of people before me, the artists and musicians, was the
love of it. I was reading up and saw the movie Listen Up by Quincy Jones,
which gave me knowledge of what he went through. Then I’d take time and listen
to what other people went through, but they still show a passion and they’re
still around doing it. The money is the last thing you think of. Of course,
you think about the money later on because my concern today is the family I
have, take care of my wellbeing. I’m proud to say my youngest is in the first
year at college, my oldest just made me a grandfather. But during that
primetime I wasn’t thinking about the money, just doing it, enjoying it,
having fun with it, proceeding with it, let it roll.
Monk One 
What do you think the attitude of some of the pioneers, who you knew and came
up with, would be when they look back and see what they helped start has
become? Most of them, they saw next to no monetary reward for what they’ve
done.
DJ Red Alert 
Of course, a lot of the pioneers are very bitter because they don’t see any
return from what they started. But you’ve got to think in these terms: once
again, I always use this as an analogy because it’s what I loved before I got
into music, Dr J was one of the most creative people in basketball, someone
who took it to another level, but he wasn’t getting that money compared to
what you see Lebron getting now. So it’s all in the form of time. The pioneers
were doing their thing and taking it in their stride, but nobody directed them
about the business, about the notion. Here it is, they become naïve and get
caught out there. So the next people that come around, they’re the ones that
start collecting. “Yo, where’s mine?” You can be mad or you can not be mad,
but you must allow yourself to learn, and not only that, maybe you can’t be on
stage, but you can go behind the scene to conduct the next person, show the
next person, you may collect from them. That’s the way to go about it.
Monk One 
Right. So, I know that you’re going to play some music for all the people here in Seattle
and you’re going to have to get prepared for that, so we’re not going to get
too in depth, but I’d like to see if you can give the people here an idea of
some of the foundation records that are essential for understanding the hip-hop spirit. Talk about the breaks.
DJ Red Alert 
Well, what I’ve brought tonight, I’ve brought records from the beginning of
the hip-hop era and a lot of the old school rap records from the '80s. Plus
I’ve brought some old reggae and some old classics. I feel I’ve just brought
some feel good music, some good old feel good music that people can reminisce
about and enjoy and vibe with.
Monk One 
Now, what about if we’re out at the club tonight and we hear a song that we
love but we don’t what the title is? Now do you have your labels blacked out
or switched around?
DJ Red Alert 
No, I didn’t do that. I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you.
Monk One 
Sounds good. Red’s definitely still on the radio, a big presence to this day.
Can you tell people where they can hear you?
DJ Red Alert 
Yes, back in New York I do Power 105.1 the Old School At Noon, Monday to
Fridays at 12. Aside from that I’m on Sirius Satellite Radio, been on Sirius
for four years on a channel called Boombox. It’s very clever for what I’m
programming because I’m playing old school hip-hop combined with Chemical Brothers,
Prodigy, Crystal Method, everybody within that sect.
Monk One 
So you’re playing Prodigy in your sets?
DJ Red Alert 
Listen here: nobody expected me to be cutting up “Honky Tonk Woman” by The
Rolling Stones.
Monk One 
No, they didn’t.
DJ Red Alert 
So I’m just learning to be creative and open-minded.
Monk One 
So it seems like the real spirit of hip-hop might be about being creative
rather than following a particular trend.
DJ Red Alert 
Yes, it is. The reason why you heard the term hip-hop, it came from the media.
The media used to always the hear the MCs reciting, “The hip, the hop, the
hippety,” they said, “What’s that? The hip-hop, the be-bop, oh, that’s hip-hop.” So it became a stamp and people look at it as a music form and not
acknowledging everything else that was going on besides the music. When we
were not being able to go downtown to certain places because of our age, or
because you had to have a certain attire, you weren’t allowed to express
yourself. Everybody just stayed in the neighbourhood and became as they are,
and before you know it, they perfect their footwork, or what you do on the
dancefloor, or what you do on the mic, or what you do playing certain records
or drawing on the trains or drawing on the walls. That became part of a
culture that got together at one time.
Monk One 
Alright, well I want to give everyone a chance to ask anything they might have on their
minds, take the chance to talk to somebody who really was there from the very beginning. I’d
like to open it up now.
Audience Member 
Hi, I'm interested in how you felt when the importance of the DJs declined and MCs became increasingly important. 
DJ Red Alert
Can you say that a little louder please?
Audience Member 
The founding fathers of hip-hop like Afrika Bambaataa and Kool Herc,
Grandmaster Flash, they’re all DJs and at a certain time the spotlight changed
from the DJs to the MCs. As a DJ, how did you feel when that happened?
DJ Red Alert 
I felt, if you gonna spotlight, you should spotlight everyone as an equal. Once the recording field came in place they emphasised the person who was recording, who was the MC. It's like saying... if you’re going to put on James Brown, also put on the Fabulous Flames, which was the group. But they don’t do that within the marketing and promotion, they
only focus on what they call the rappers today and leave the DJs out. In the beginning, you used to hear Grandmaster Flash and The Furious Five and Eric B. & Rakim, to give an
example. You don't hear that no more. The only people who do that today are Gang Starr, you get them both, they’re equal, the MC and the DJ. Not only that, but a lot of rappers don’t
even have DJs now, they just want to use a machine. So it’s the recording
field that really dissected everything. Anybody else?
Audience Member 
I was wondering how you got your DJ name?
DJ Red Alert 
Before I got into music – I usually skip this part – I was known for playing
basketball, high school ball. I was one toothpick, I was one little narrow-ass
skinny big afro kid. Everybody knew my style of play and the first thing they
did when I was up and down the court was scream out the sounds of the firemen
[makes sound like siren blaring] and then somebody starts saying: “Red
alert, red alert.” That name just stuck. At the same time, I get a load of
everybody so they just added Kool to it. And that’s what happened.
Audience Member 
I guess another one, always a good one, ask a DJ who their favourite DJ is or do you not
have one?
DJ Red Alert 
It all depends, there’s so many different ones that I enjoy. There’s a guy
back in New York, originally from Philadelphia, I enjoy the sounds of my man Rich Medina, he’s bad. My man who
guy everybody knew as the MC D-Nice, he got into DJing, he’s doing his
thing now. Who else can I say? I still enjoy my cousin Jazzy, he’s still on
point with his cuts, and Theodore. It all depends on what mood it is.
Audience Member 
And another one, are there any records you’re looking for that you still haven’t found?
DJ Red Alert 
You’ve got me right there. I can’t think of any right now, but if I come up
with any I’ll tell you.
Audience Member 
I just asked because it seems like you’ve got a lot of records. How many would
you say you have?
DJ Red Alert 
Nowhere near Bam, I know that. But I’ve got a great amount, because I still
receive records every day.
Monk One 
I ran into your nephew a couple of years ago and he told me there was a whole house
full of records that belonged to you that he had to get rid of. It was all
promos from back in those days when you were receiving all kinds of stuff. Now, he said there were 10,000 records he had to
get rid of. He’s got a lot of records.
DJ Red Alert 
Not only that, rest in peace to my mother, she used to always get mad because
she used to complain about the records [makes muttering sound]. I said,
“Mum, it pays the bills.” God bless her. That’s another thing I meant to
mention, my mother had a big part in my career. During the time when I was
getting into DJing, I’d be in the back room playing the records and my father, rest in peace, would say: “Cut that off, cut that damn shit off.” My mother used to say: “I’d
rather have him in the back than have him in the street.“ ”I don’t want to
hear that.” My father saw I got involved in the radio but then he passed away.
Then I’d start winning awards and I’d always say to my mother: “I wish dad was
here to see this seeing as how he used to complain.” And my mother would say:
“He’s looking at you right now, he’s looking down at you and he’s smiling.” 
Not only that, but a little later when my mother had retired, she became like a mother to everybody who used to come by, because my house was the house to quote/unquote, the
house to hang, sleep, whatever. Everybody from the Jungle Brothers, Tribe to
De La, to Latifah, to Lyte, everybody just came in there and vibed and
everybody took their mums. Been three years since she’s no longer with me, but
she had been the backbone for me, my nephew Mike and a host of others. She was
a spearhead, definitely a spearhead.
Monk One 
Rest in peace.
DJ Red Alert 
[speaking to audience] Hard to get out those couches, right?
Audience Member 
Coming from South Africa to the US and looking in, the hip-hop scene outside
of the US, there’s more appreciation for the old school outside than there is
here. My question is, rock music still acknowledges Mick Jagger, all the old
legends, so how do you feel about the young generation trying to deny the
people who laid the foundations?
DJ Red Alert 
From generation to generation, instead of acknowledging what went before them,
it’s a principle they want to be acknowledged first. That’s a general fact,
there’s always going to be history before you. Some people, not everyone, are
always going to have their thing where they say, “That was them, this is me,
acknowledge me, this is what’s happening.” Until it’s going to be their turn,
when they get older and someone else comes along. You think about I, I, I, but
if it wasn’t for them, them, them, there wouldn’t be no you, you, you. So
respect the people before you, and not only that, but if you respect the
people before you, not only won’t they forget you, but they’ll pull you along.
That’s why we still talk about James Brown today. The average little kid still
knows about James Brown, the average little kid still knows about Michael
Jackson. Sad part about hip-hop is the average kid still doesn’t know about
Big Daddy Kane. So stop
thinking about yourself. Yes, you want to build, you want to be acknowledged,
but acknowledge the people who helped you.
Monk One 
Do you think people out there are doing that? Are the younger generation gonna learn about Big Daddy Kane?
DJ Red Alert 
That comes from the media and the way communication is concerned. The sad part: radio. Radio only wants to go with
its advertisers because that’s business. If you have a radio station, it
doesn’t have to be R&B and hip-hop, you could have any genre but they
cater to an audience demo of 18 to 34. They only want you to play the music
that will attract that audience. Now, if it’s records older than that audience
they don’t want you touching it. If you don’t touch those records, those
records will dissolve. If those records dissolve, nobody will know the history
of the artists, the records, so forth. That’s the missing pattern. When I do
the Old School At Noon back in New York, and I use Big Daddy Kane as an
example because he was big at one point. The average female, maybe 20, 21, has
never heard of him. Ten years ago she was 11, 12, but that was ‘94/‘95,
whereas Kane’s heyday was 1990, so they don’t know that. Then again I try to
bridge a little bit of everything for them to acknowledge. It’s only right for
you to acknowledge your past.
Monk One 
On the Old School At Noon show you’ll be touching on all the old school
classics?
DJ Red Alert 
There’s a guideline because it’s business. Of course, I don’t care for it, but I got to stick to the rules. On the Old School At Noonhey don’t want me go nowhere past 1990.
Monk One 
That’s old school in New York?
DJ Red Alert 
To that audience, the 18 to 34, they want me to be from 1990-up, they don’t
want 1990-down. Then again, the other demos, like Kiss FM and WBLS where their
audience is 25 to 54, they don’t want to be bothered with none of the early
hip-hop and I always complain and say to them, “But they grew up with that
early hip-hop.” They still try to put that stamp that hip-hop is negative. OK,
you may look at hip-hop as negative but you look at it from the beginning to
like ’88, none of the records were offensive at that time. They were either
dance records or novelty records. It’s really from ’88 you started hearing the
destruction of N.W.A. or King Tee, just as an example of where you started hearing all the lyrics that then
got deep going into the '90s. People used to say Run DMC were loud and
obnoxious but you appreciate Run DMC today. Radio has a lot to do with
dissecting the audience. The Rolling Stones is now on tour. There’s a 12-year
old knows about Rolling Stones through their parents. How come a 12-year old
in the hip-hop field can’t acknowledge Grandmaster Flash & The Furious
Five? That’s a mistake.
Monk One 
It’s a good thing we have Red Alert out here giving us that perspective and
I’m sure tonight he’ll have a lot in store for us as far as education.
DJ Red Alert 
I just want you to have fun.
Monk One 
Edutainment.
DJ Red Alert 
I just want you to have fun. But I thank you for allowing me to be out here.
Monk One 
That’s it, Red Alert.
