Raised to the sounds of the East Coast underground freak-punk scene, Dre Skull perceives urban music culture as a holistic affair and follows the paths of Don Was, Rick Rubin and Heavy D in terms of working with artists from various fields. After lacing beats for heavy hitters such as Beenie Man, Popcaan and Pusha T, the mighty Major Lazer asked Dre Skull to co-produce Snoop Dogg’s reggae-fied reincarnation as Snoop Lion. 
In his lecture at the 2013 Red Bull Music Academy, the vybz master talked about how he became one of Jamaica’s most in-demand beatmakers.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Our guest this afternoon is a DJ/producer from Brooklyn. He’s been making
music for about ten years now, runs a rather diverse and also rather excellent
record label called Mixpak, and in some
interesting turn of events has become one of the world’s most sought-after
dancehall producers, working with the likes of Beenie Man, Vybz Kartel, Popcaan and some guy called
Snoop Lion. So, there’s a lot of stuff going on, I think a lot of
stories to tell. Give him a very warm welcome.
[applause]
So, maybe shall we play some music to start off? This is a record that came
out two weeks ago, three weeks ago? When did it come out?
Dre Skull 
Four weeks ago.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Four weeks ago, OK, sorry.
(music: Dre Skull feat. Megan James & Popcaan  – “First Time” / applause)
DAVIDE BORTOT
So, I think there’s quite a lot to be said about the music, the influences on
this record, but maybe we could start off by you telling us how this record
actually came about, because it has quite an interesting and long history,
right?
Dre Skull
Yeah, I mean it’s definitely kind of an interesting story behind it. The
instrumental was a riddim I had released last summer, called the “Loudspeaker
Riddim.” If you’re not familiar
with dancehall riddim culture, it’s quite common to get multiple songs written
on the same instrumental track. So, the original release had Popcaan, Beenie
Man, Natalie Storm and Machel Montano. It did quite well as a riddim release and Popcaan’s track
“The System” was pretty well-received in Jamaica and elsewhere. Machel
Montano, who’s a soca artist from Trinidad, his track was also pretty well-
received. I basically got approached by Puma, the brand, and they were
interested in me doing a new version on the riddim and the director was, “We’d
like to get a new female vocal.” I thought it might be an interesting
opportunity to move outside the dancehall, Caribbean context. The lead
vocalist is Megan James who’s in Purity Ring, if you’re familiar, an
electronic act, with a guest verse from Popcaan. So, I reached out to Megan
James’ management, just because I was a fan of her work, and despite being on
tour and being quite busy she was interested, liked the track. So she was able
to record that, I think, in a hotel room while she was on tour. Then I thought
it could use a little bit more energy and it would be interesting to bring it
back with Popcaan. Popcaan actually, I think, delivered three different verses
and I think the first two, they were good but they didn’t feel quite right, so
I ended up flying down to Kingston for a very quick 24-hour trip. I think I
went in the studio at midnight, worked until 6am and flew out the next
morning, and so he got that track done. I think one thing that draws me to
dancehall, particularly as a producer, is just that you have this unique
opportunity to hear different vocalists and different songs on the track or
the beat that you make. It’s really interesting to see the different energy
and the different vibe that people can find in a track, so I’m really happy
with what she found and what Popcaan brought to the table.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
If you look at the original “Loudspeaker” release, the artists on that riddim
are already pretty diverse. You’ve got Machel Montana, who’s a soca artist,
and you have Popcaan, who’s a dancehall artist but has a very melodic way of
singing, so it’s very different vocalists and very different energy levels.
How do you approach a riddim like that as a producer? Do you have any specific
vocals in mind, then see what other people do with it, or would you rather try
and create something which can work for quite a lot of different vocalists?
Dre Skull 
I guess, not just in the dancehall context but in general, one of my favourite
things is bringing a track that inevitably, in the process of making, I’ve
heard it hundreds of times, basically, and so it is imprinted on my mind as an
instrumental. So, one of my favourite things is to take it to a vocalist and
that’s where it really becomes a collaboration, and it’s quite often that I’m
just completely blown away or very surprised with choices a vocalist will
make. I mean, Megan’s vocal on this is very laid back and ethereal. I know her
work so it wasn’t a complete surprise, but it’s not exactly what I pictured on
the riddim, but at the same time totally excited to get that back. Same thing
with the Popcaan version, on his track “The System.” He did a very heartfelt
kind of sufferation song about ghetto youth. Having lived with the track for
some years before it got voiced, I was just surprised that that’s what he
heard in the track. So, it’s kind of a thrill to see what different people
find. As a producer I don’t necessarily want to dictate to a vocalist, like,
“This is exactly what I want you to do.” Sometimes I do have that conversation
and it’s a back and forth conversation, but a lot of times, if I feel like the
artist is a competent creator, I want them to bring their own thing to the
table and I don’t want to step on their toes before they get to offer that up.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
You mentioned “The System.” We could play the video. That was a huge record in
the dancehall scene, I think, and it’s also quite different from what we just
heard, despite the fact it’s the same riddim track.
(music: Popcaan - “The System”  / applause)
DAVIDE BORTOT
You talk about this as if it was the most normal thing in the world: “Yeah, I
flew out to Jamaica, 24 hours, just recorded Popcaan.” But how did it actually
happen that you would start working with these people? I mean, for those of
you who don’t know, this guy is a huge deal. He’s probably one of the three
biggest reggae dancehall artists right now, arguably the biggest. So, when did
you first start working with artists of that calibre from Jamaica?
Dre Skull 
Basically, as a producer I’ve always wanted to be working with vocalists and I
think it was probably 2008. I’d been working with different people in the US
and trying to work with different people in the US, but I had made a decision
that I wanted to reach out and try to work with some Jamaican vocalists. At
that point I had no real connections and I hadn’t really been down to Jamaica
to work, so basically, through the Internet I found some people in the world
of dancehall.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
What does that mean, “through the Internet, some people”?
Dre Skull 
Essentially, just asking around and getting kind of like, “Oh, you need to
talk to this person, you need to talk to that person,” sort of thing. So,
through my work as a DJ and just talking with different DJs, and they tell me
to call this person or email this person. I basically was able to work with
Sizzla and that was something where I didn’t get to meet him, and I still
haven’t met him, but basically I had a riddim, sent it down through email. He
sent a ProTools session back and then I finished mixing and making the song. I
repeated that process with Vybz Kartel and when I reached out to him, he was
obviously a very big artist but he still hadn’t hit his full peak. His track
“Ramping Shop” was just building buzz in the US and that went on to be a
‘Billboard Hot 100 radio play’-type of song that built up him that much more,
so it was a little bit fortuitous. Again, that was facilitated through the
Internet. I guess, basically he voiced a track for me called “Yuh
Love” and I didn’t really get to
interact with him about the track too much, and I didn’t know what I would be
getting back. But he sent this track “Yuh Love,” which was a very romantic
love song, a little bit unusual for him and it just took on a life of its own
and became a big hit on its own. Ultimately, I guess, it was very fortuitous
and a bit lucky, but through that song, then people started coming to me,
emailing me, and saying, “We’d like to do this with you or do that with you.”
About maybe nine months or so after “Yuh Love” had been out and had been
building, I started going down to Jamaica, so I got to meet Kartel and it went
from there.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
You’re originally from Massachusetts, right? Where exactly?
Dre Skull 
Actually, I was born in Cleveland and my family moved around but my folks live
up in Massachusetts, but I’ve been in Brooklyn for about eight years and lived
down in Philadelphia before that.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Why did you move to Brooklyn, because of the music, or was there any other
reason?
Dre Skull 
It was a bunch of friends of mine were living in a warehouse in Brooklyn and a
room opened up. There wasn’t a strong reason, just something that happened.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
You’ve been making music for maybe ten years, a bit more, but your first
release, if I’m not wrong, was in 2007-ish, and I think people started to
notice more what you do in 2009 when you launched your own label. What did you
do between 2002 and 2007?
Dre Skull 
Well, I was doing a lot of different sorts of things in New York. But in terms
of creative pursuits, when I moved into Brooklyn I moved into this four-storey
warehouse and pretty much everyone, apart from myself, had gone to art school
and was pretty engaged in the New York art world. A number of us were doing
different performance-type art or installation sort of things with video and
audio, so that was kind of my original creative output when I got to New York.
A lot of that work was reworking popular culture, say, with editing videos or
reappropriating different pieces of music. It was good and it was interesting
and we had some level of success, although doing performance art you cannot
really make too much money. [laughs] I mean, there’s nothing to sell, it’s a
one-time thing, so there’s a lot of effort and it’s this ephemeral sort of
thing that’s basically gone. But ultimately, working in a group, people had
different ideas about what was important to them and so forth. For me, at a
certain point I realized I don’t want to be deconstructing culture, popular
music or popular films or video content, I’d rather try to build it up from
scratch. I think that was the real shift for me. I was just like, “I would
rather be making popular music or songs that have a life of their own instead
of tinkering with someone else’s songs and video.”
DAVIDE BORTOT 
The whole idea of making popular music, pop music, was that always something
that was of interest to you, something that inspired you? Because, obviously
you came up through the whole club scene at large, being a DJ, producer,
putting out 12” releases and being somewhat of a household name in that world.
Now you’re working with people like Snoop Dogg and other people that I’m not
allowed to mention, so that’s quite a journey, that’s quite a transition and I
think a very different type of working as well. Was it always your ambition to
be that type of producer or did it just accidentally happen?
Dre Skull 
That’s a good question. I think making pop music, and I use that term very
broadly, for me, working with these dancehall artists is making popular music.
It’s within a genre but it’s songs that take on life as songs and I guess
that’s really what I mean when I say pop music. I think the draw there is
partially just because I felt it was the hardest thing for me to do. It wasn’t
like I went, naturally I know how to make pop music and that’s what I’m going
to go do. It was this challenge like, how is pop music made, or as a producer,
how do you mix full songs and refine them? In a way it was just the challenge
of it that was somehow a draw. And I think over the course of my life, songs
have lived in my mind or in my life more than just like, say, a club track or
something. Those can be amazing, beautiful things and they have certain
contexts where they work absolutely perfectly, but there’s something about
songs that had a real pull on me.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Having worked with popular culture on a more theoretical level as a
performance artist, does that inform your work if you try and write a pop song
these days, or is it something that you try to keep away from your creative
process?
Dre Skull 
I don’t know, that’s a good question. I mean, I don’t come to music as a
super-skilled musician. I didn’t grow up playing piano or guitar or something
like that in a really formal way, so I think for me it started by looking at
songs and having to take them apart. I don’t know about theoretically, but
just conceptually like, “This is a verse, how many bars is that? This is pre-chorus, how many bars is that and how does that lead into the chorus?” Just
really analyzing music in that way and trying to analyse it enough that it
becomes intuitive. Then you can take different things from different genres or
different types of songs and create new songs using some of that DNA, if you
will.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Speaking of different genres, on your label you release quite a lot of
different music. You have a punk band, you’ve put out some New Orleans bounce
stuff, some clubby electronic stuff, obviously dancehall. Did you always
listen to all these kinds of genres, or was there anything that attracted you
in the first place?
Dre Skull 
I think probably with my love of rap music and hip-hop, that music has not
always, but it’s often relied on sampling. When I look back that’s what I
think happened, whether it’s a DJ Premier track or Public Enemy or whoever, depending on how you relate to music in general. For me as a
producer I’m kind of wondering, “Where are those samples coming from?” And
tracing those roots to the original source material. Quite naturally, you’re
going to end up listening to a wide, wide range. I think many hip-hop
producers will tell you, “I listen to everything,” and I think it’s that kind
of ear, of realising there’s amazing music across all genres.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
How did you actually start making music, then?
Dre Skull 
I think I started not with a computer but with a four-track, with a little
cassette tape. In some ways there’s a certain freedom to that because it’s
very limited what you can do. You can set the tape to play at different speeds
and record at different speeds and do different experimental stuff like that.
But I quickly graduated to a computer and, really, it’s as a producer, just a
solitary sort of pursuit. It became a hobby and then a passion and now more of
a career.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
What’s your set-up these days then? Do you still try to limit yourself in
terms of the equipment, now that you probably have access to more
professional, more well-staffed studios?
Dre Skull 
Yeah, I think I do. I know some producers make a conceptual decision like,
“I’m making music with this drum machine and this synth and that’s what this
project is,” or something very defined like that. I don’t quite do that but I
pretty much strictly make music on a laptop, whether I’m in the studio or at
home or in a hotel room or anywhere. That freedom, you know? Actually the
“Loudspeaker Riddim,” that was the track behind “First Time” and Popcaan’s
“The System,” that was recorded on an aeroplane. I mean, the original idea was
done on an aeroplane sitting at the tray table. I really think it’s a unique
thing that we are able to make music wherever we are, if we have a laptop, so
I try to take advantage of that rather than confine myself to something that
has to be in a studio context.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
You mentioned Vybz Kartel before. I don’t know if all you guys are familiar
with him. He’s probably the most influential dancehall artist of the past five
to ten years. I would like to play a track, which is the other video.
(music: Vybz Kartel - “Go Go Wine” / applause)
DAVIDE BORTOT 
So you mentioned that you had recorded the first track over the Internet, but
then you ended up going to Jamaica and actually working with him in the
studio. And you ended up producing his whole album, which I think is quite an
uncommon thing in dancehall to do anyway, just produce an entire album. And
then, for you to not come from that scene and obviously only having worked
with him over the Internet, how exactly did that happen?
Dre Skull 
As I said, it was a bit of a fortuitous, random thing, but based on the
strength of “Yuh Love” I had made plans to go down to Kingston to record a bit
more and so I got in the studio with Kartel. I think I brought three or four
tracks for him to record on. He works incredibly quickly.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
How long does a song like this take to come together for him?
Dre Skull 
I’ve never heard of anything this quick or worked with anyone, but even heard
of anything. The way it would usually work is, I show up with the music. I
don’t play him 20 beats and he picks three, I play him four beats and he
records on all four. Generally, he will sit down in a chair. The track is
already loaded up in ProTools and the lights go down, the mic is turned on.
He’s got no pen and paper and the first time he hears the song, the record
button is already pushed on the mic. So, he’s maybe for the first ten or
fifteen minutes he’s just listening back and he’s starting to, not mumble, but
just hum and make different guttural sorts of sounds and find cadences and
melody ideas. And I should say, he’ll tell the engineer, “Keep that little
bit,” or, “Keep that little bit,” even though it’s this non-verbal sort of
thing. That’ll be saved and muted and those are his guide reference points
when he feels like he found something quite good. Then within ten or fifteen
minutes he’s now recording words onto the track. Within an hour, maybe an hour
and half, the song is completely written, completely recorded. He’s recorded
his doubles, his ad libs. It’s unbelievable. I think it’s because he’s an
incredibly hard-working entertainer. I think he’s probably recording like
fifteen songs a week for years, if not for over a decade, so he’s definitely
done 3000 or 4000 songs or more. He’s really honed something and obviously has
deep talent. I think when I went down there that first time we did three or
four songs in one or two nights, and at the end of it he said, “I think we
made a mini-album.” I don’t think prior to that trip I would dream like, “Oh
yeah, I should produce a Vybz Kartel album.” That was kind of outside the
realm of what might be possible so I don’t even think I imagined that, but
when he said that - we had been getting along well and it felt like a good
creative connection - I was like, “Well, what do you think? Maybe we should do
an album.” And he was like, “We should definitely try to do that.” Then it
took about a year, but I would go down maybe four or five times over the
course of the next year and I would bring three or four songs every time.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
So, it’s three days of tracking him down and then 30 minutes of recording?
Dre Skull 
 [laughs] Yeah, I definitely spent days in Kingston just waiting, where he
would be like, “Yeah, 8 PM tonight we’re good,” and then at eight he’s
like, “Ten, we’re good at ten.” “We’re good at midnight.” And then he never
shows up. So it was really a certain amount of patience and waiting but I knew
that was part of the deal so it wasn’t so bad. But once we got in the studio
it was just unbelievable.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
So apart from the waiting, which I think everybody’s familiar with who’s ever
been to Jamaica before, can you tell us a bit more about how it’s like coming
there? I mean, the place is pretty special. Obviously, the role that music
plays in the country is incredible, probably unlike anywhere else in the
world, so maybe you can tell us a bit more. How is it like, touching down for
the first time?
Dre Skull 
I guess, I didn’t completely know what to expect the first time. At this point
I’ve been lucky enough to go to many studios and meet a lot of different
people in the business, vocalists and producers and everything, and to go to a
lot of parties and see soundsystems and everything. To me, it’s unbelievable,
this island that has, I think, about three million people; just the number of
studios and successful artists per capita, particularly that have such an
international reach. I don’t know if there’s another place in the world that
has anything similar, so it is very special to be able to work with artists
that come from that culture, because music is such a deeply ingrained part.
There’s such a deep history there.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
You mentioned that there’s a lot of successful artists there. At the same time
I think the industry is struggling. It’s pretty hard for artists to create a
substantial revenue, just because it’s a small island, and it’s hard to cross
over internationally. Obviously, people don’t buy records anymore and I think
reggae suffered probably more from that than any other genre. But you at the
same time are pretty successful at what you do and seem to be able to make a
living, so why do you think that is?
Dre Skull 
Well, I’m not totally sure, but maybe I have a bit of a benefit from not
having been deeply involved in the dancehall business as it has been
historically structured. I mean, there’s different labels like VP and then in
the early 2000s a lot of US or international major labels were signing artists
like Elephant Man and Beenie Man and other artists to big international deals
that would give them a big push internationally. But unfortunately, like I was
saying, in the US dancehall has a pretty limited ability to reach major radio,
because for whatever reason New York, Hartford, Boston and maybe Atlanta and
Miami are the main radio markets, but a lot of the country is shut out, or
shuts out dancehall, so it does make it a bit harder. And maybe it becomes a
chicken and egg thing where A&Rs at majors are thinking, “We shouldn’t
invest in this because the radio potential is limited and therefore the sales
potential is limited.” At the same time, the radio people are probably seeing,
“Oh, the labels aren’t really pushing this, so we shouldn’t really go out on a
limb and try to see what this track can do.” In terms of what I’ve been doing
from the business side, I just think there is a huge demand and level of
appreciation of this music around the world. Given that the music industry as
it’s been known to exist is kind of crumbling, I think it’s a good time to be
a disruptor and try to find new ways, whether it’s new revenue streams or just
new ways to present the music to different people who might not be core-market
dancehall fans.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
One of the problems, obviously that the scene is facing is some of the lyrical
content, just because it’s very specific to the culture, I guess. You coming
from a totally different culture, how did you find relating to some of the
things that an artist that Kartel talks about in his lyrics, like bleaching or
certain views on sexuality that are very far away from what I think the kind
of people that you would be dealing with here in New York? How did you find
dealing with this sort of conflict, or this sort of contrast?
Dre Skull 
A couple of things: just generally as a producer who’s not usually writing
lyrics, it’s always interesting because when you collaborate with someone
you’re giving up a certain amount of control. Particularly if you make the
music and someone else is writing the lyrics, whether it’s a pop song or a
dancehall song or a rap song or anything else. Does everything that rapper
said on your beat speak to you directly or to your experience, or are you 100
percent behind every word that was said or every thought that was put out
there? It’s an interesting aspect of being a producer. But with respect to
Kartel, say, or working with dancehall artists, I feel pretty good about the
messages he’s sharing, say, on Kingston Story. It’s a wide range of songs, some of it’s
sufferation stuff, some of it’s definitely for the club and parties, “Go Go
Wine,” this kind of song for the dancers. Just to watch that music have a
life, I think I can feel good about it. There’s another track on the album
called “Half On A Baby.” It’s
amazing when you put that music into the world all sorts of things can happen
that you would never have anticipated. That song, for some strange reason,
really took hold in the Bronx and in New York, not even with the core
dancehall crowd but actually with more of a Latino crowd. There’s this dance
called the Bronx wine, which is huge with 15-year-old kids in the Bronx and in
Brooklyn and all around New York.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Can you show it to us?
[laughter]
Dre Skull 
No, sir, but go on YouTube and type in “Bronx wine.” That song, for example,
in terms of new revenue streams and working in this business - and again, we
didn’t plan for this - every day for the last year there’s ten to 20 people
uploading videos of themselves in front of their webcams doing the Bronx wine.
Even though we didn’t do a video for that song and even though we didn’t get
to fully push it as a single the way we would have liked, it just picked up by
these kids and we monetize all these videos. And that’s OK, but more
importantly, I think it’s been the best-selling Kartel song in the US for the
last five months, and that’s just through this very viral, organic
development.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
So, how important is YouTube as a revenue source for you running a label? How
does Mixpak make money? Obviously, everyone knows nobody’s buying records any
more. There’s some digital sales but this can’t possibly be enough money to
make a living off of it. So, how important is something like YouTube and how
have you been engaging with this platform as an entrepreneur?
Dre Skull 
It’s interesting and it kind of fell into our laps or definitely just exploded
without us planning to, “OK, let’s figure out how to monetize YouTube.” We
just kind of recognized, I mean, Kartel is such a big name and his total, all
Kartel videos on YouTube, it’s got to be well over 100 million views. We were
recognizing that people were posting the songs and reposting the videos, and
at a certain point we became content partners with YouTube. It’s been eye-opening because we do actually make pretty good money on sales, say with the
Kartel album, and that’s a continuing monthly revenue stream for us, which is
great, but then it’s just been amazing because when we invested money in that
project and put the album out, we didn’t have YouTube in mind, but actually we
make, let’s say, like thousands of dollars a month on Kartel-related YouTube
revenue. So, it is important and now that we’ve seen that it’s shifting some
of the business decisions we’re making in terms of saying, “OK, yeah, we can
afford to go to Kingston and shoot a music video.” Traditionally, a music
video is an expense that a label makes, it’s a marketing expense and you hope
to make it back in sales, but with what we’ve got going with YouTube now, it’s
actually not. Ideally, it is serving a marketing function but it’s actually a
product to be consumed, essentially, and so ideally it’s going to at least pay
for itself if not become a source of its own profit.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
So, business aside, the fact that you put out a proper album, which is a
rarity in Jamaica with this type of music, from a creative perspective, how
did you approach making an album? You mentioned the first four records more or
less came about as an accident and weren’t planned to be for an album, but was
there any sort of concept to the record, any sort of overarching theme that
you tried to give to it? It was the first time for you, right, producing a
full-on album?
Dre Skull 
Yeah, it was the first time. I wouldn’t say there was a complete, overarching
concept. Definitely, I recognized that the business side of the dancehall
business is very much around riddims and riddim releases and singles, so a lot
of times a big artist album is pretty much like a collection of their biggest
hits over the last two or three years, plus a couple of new songs. So, I
thought, “Why isn’t someone” - and it has happened, but generally speaking -
“Why hasn’t there been a focus on albums and maybe you could make a bigger
impact?” That was kind of the idea, because particularly with the internet,
collecting the singles from the last few years, it’s much more likely that a
lot more people have heard those songs, so if you buy that album you’re very
familiar with the music already. So, I just thought it might be an interesting
thing where we could really just surprise everyone. Kartel was still putting
out singles while we were making the record and so he was very much staying
relevant and pretty much staying on top of the dancehall industry, but like,
“Let’s show a greater body of work.” I really approached it as something like,
“How can we showcase Kartel’s talents in a very well put together” - or try to
do it well put together – “array of songs with an arc to it?” But it wasn’t a
total concept album in terms of, it’s all about this. I think if anything the
concept was, let’s do an album, which was almost conceptual in the dancehall
context.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
You’re now working on Popcaan’s album as well, right?
Dre Skull 
I am, yeah. The Kartel album was pretty much me on production throughout and
so for this one I’m taking more of an executive producer role. I am producing
a bunch of tracks on the record but Dubble Dutch, who’s a Mixpak artist, is
doing some really great work and has a bunch of songs on it and then we have a
number of Jamaican producers, Anju Blaxx and Jamie Young Vibes and then Adde
Instrumentals so it’s not completely the same sort of affair in terms of how
the album’s coming together, but I’m really excited. I think we’ve done 14 or
15 songs and I’m hoping it’ll be ready for the fall and that should be another
Mixpak record as well.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
What was he like in studio, how was it working with him?
Dre Skull 
It’s great. I first met him when I was making Kingston Story. He kind of
came up in Kartel’s crew and so he would come ‘round the studio sometimes and
so we had that connection. I think we’ve done three singles together since
then. Every artist is different, and like I mentioned with “The System,” he
really surprised me with that, with the content and direction he took that in,
and I’d the say the same goes for the album. I really think he writes amazing
pop songs, very much in a dancehall context but I feel like he has a lot of...
I mean, he already has, but I was going to say he has a lot of ability to
cross over. I think he has already landed in the Billboard Hot 100 charts,
which again is kind of hard for a dancehall artist to do in the US, so that
shows something. Also, I think another interesting thing is, a lot of the
biggest names in dancehall are a bit older and I kind of feel like that is
because there used to be more money in the dancehall business coming in from,
say, US labels and so there was more marketing dollars to build up those names.
Then, as that money has dried up, those people kind of keep the crowns that
they have, so to speak, and there’s really no room to build up new, younger
artists. He’s kind of a rare exception in my opinion. I think he’s maybe 23-
or 24-years-old and he’s one of the biggest names in the world in terms of
dancehall, so I think it’s really refreshing that there’s a new voice speaking
for a new generation. I think he has a lot of potential to push things further
in a cool way that hasn’t been done.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Through working with Kartel, I think you changed your sound a lot and maybe
opened up to a bit more of an international audience. A lot of the stuff he
does these days is in a way influenced by the work you guys did together. So,
you developed some sort of producer/artist relationship. When he went to jail
- for those of you who don’t know, he’s currently in jail on murder charges -
how did you react to that? It’s obviously a crazy situation. How did that feel
for you, not knowing exactly what was going on?
Dre Skull 
When I first heard he was arrested, I didn’t hear the charges or anything, and
actually over the course of making our album he had been arrested and held
without charges. I wouldn’t say I’m an expert on the Jamaican justice system,
but that initial time they asked him to come in for questioning and then they
said, “We’re going to hold you for 24 hours.” Then they said, “We’re going to
hold you for a week.” Then it was two weeks and after two and a half weeks
they let him go, no charges. At least comparing that to the US justice system
that seemed a bit odd. When I first heard he was arrested again, we were about
seven or eight days away from shooting the “Half On A Baby” video, it was
going to be the second single for the album. So, I assumed he’s just been
picked up and he’ll be held for a little bit and released and it’s probably no
big deal. Once I heard there was murder charges, obviously, I was shocked.
Working with him, that’s the last thing I could possibly expect. I think that
pretty much goes for most people I know. I’d like to assume that he’s innocent
until proven guilty, and again with the Jamaican justice system, I think it’s
been about two and a half years, a little bit over that, that he’s been locked
up with no trial, no charges. So, one wonders or one hears that he offended
the wrong person and they’re just going to hold him, teach him a lesson and
not charge him, so I just want to presume that he was not actually involved in
any of that and hope for the best.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Have you been in touch with him since?
Dre Skull 
Obviously, when someone’s locked up it’s a bit hard to be in touch.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Well, he still manages to release a couple of songs a week, even though some
of the material might be old.
Dre Skull 
Allegedly, there’s been allegations that he’s recorded in prison but he has
refuted those. I have been able to talk with people close with him, so in that
way communicate on certain business stuff that we’re dealing with. He
basically has communicated that he’s keeping his head up and doing all right,
but yeah, not a lot of direct communciation.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
A lot of your music, obviously, there’s a Jamaican influence. Some of your
early releases on Mixpak had a lot of remixes by European producers. You have
a Japanese band on your label. How much of New York is in your music? Is that
of any importance to you, or is it just a place where you happen to live and
happen to have a family, but don’t really care that much beyond that?
Dre Skull 
I don’t know what a listener would say, but for me I love listening to - and
have been for years - Funkmaster Flex. It’s such a rare thing, at least in the
US, to have a radio DJ that has that much flexibility with what he plays.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Flexibility?
Dre Skull 
There you go, yeah. So, you know, hip-hop obviously was born in New York and
still has a strong vibe. Also, New York has a really big Caribbean community,
Jamaican community and I think that’s definitely been influential. But I think
just the concrete, the architecture and the vibe itself in ways that I
probably don’t even understand. Definitely, one thing I’ve taken is that music
can sound different in different locations. I don’t know if I can describe it
that well, but definitely hearing certain songs in Kingston, it comes with a
feeling of what I’m experiencing, what I’m seeing, who I’m with, and the same
would go with New York and pretty much anywhere. So, being in New York and
making music, I’m sure that’s had a big impact.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
You mentioned your hip-hop influence. You recently worked on an album by a
relatively well known rapper. Maybe we should play a record off of that.
(music: Snoop Lion feat. Mavado & Popcaan - “Lighters Up Up” / applause)
DAVIDE BORTOT
So, what’s it like working with your childhood hero?
Dre Skull 
Basically, Diplo brought
me in on this project and when I heard who it was... He initially said, “I
want to partner with you, bring you in on this project, but I can’t tell you
who it is.” [laughs] When he eventually told me who it was, that was kind of
amazing because definitely I grew up listening to Snoop. Definitely, the first
day we were in the studio, Snoop had his wife there and it was just playing
him tracks and watching him bang his head to something I made five days before
it was kind of a surreal experience. Then, obviously, we had to get to work
and it was just a pure pleasure working with him.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Did you make the music specifically for that, with the idea in mind that you
now had to produce a reggae album for Snoop Dogg, or was that stuff that you
had already done before and thought could work well on this album?
Dre Skull 
I think pretty much every single thing I did for that album was done for this
album. I think Diplo basically brought me in and said, “Snoop is wanting to do
an album recorded in Jamaica that’s inspired by a wide range of Jamaican
music.” So, before I got to Jamaica I made probably 20 tracks with a lot of
different types of ideas.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Let me put it this way, there’s quite a few people who feel like he shouldn’t
be doing that and it’s not real reggae and it’s disrespectful to the culture,
where it comes from. Regardless of whether he did a good job on that album or
not as a vocalist, but he basically doesn’t have the right to adopt certain
symbols, images and play around with this sort of terminology and symbolism
that means quite a lot to a few people, even on a religious level. How do you
feel about that?
Dre Skull 
I don’t know. Obviously, I can recognize that it could be complicated ground
to tread, but I felt like, obviously aside from just making the music I got to
spend a lot of time with Snoop and he really shared the story of why he wanted
to make this record and it felt like a very genuine impulse. Essentially, what
he shared, which he’s said many other times publicly, is he’s getting to a
certain point in his life where he really wants to add to his legacy with a
different kind of spirit and content in the music. I personally wouldn’t fault
him for wanting to make music inspired by Jamaican music and collaborating
with different artists in Jamaica, so I don’t know. I think the main thing is,
the way I would look at something like that whether it was his project or
someone else, is what kind of attitude is this person bringing to this? Are
they sincere in what they say they want to do? And he really felt like he was
on something like a spiritual journey, so I felt honoured to be part of that
process.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
What was it like working with a producer like Diplo in the studio, who I think
a lot of times will take more of a curator role and put together people who he
believes would work amazingly well together in the studio? It’s a lot of times
not quite clear what he did on the beat, and then some beats he makes by
himself, so how exactly was the collaboration between you and him?
Dre Skull 
Well, he’s got a great musical mind; great producer, probably one of the
hardest working people I’ve come across in this business. It’s pretty amazing,
he’s probably on tour 200 to 300 days a year and yet he really is making time
to go into the studio in any country or any city he’s in. But yeah, in the
studio over the course of the work we did here, some of the songs are 100% from his mind and his vision and other songs are collaborations
between all the producers and then some of these songs, there are more things
that I brought to the table but then he said, “Hey, what if we switch the beat
up like this?” Because he’s both a producer, he’s a label owner and just kind
of a cultural figure in a way, so he’s hitting different projects from
different angles. But it was definitely a great experience to get to see him
work and to collaborate with him and just to see his mind. I mean, I think
being a DJ can be a real asset to a producer, depending on the music you make,
but I think he has a real intuitive sense of what’s going to work. It might
be, “Hey, wait, we need to speed this track up ten bpm so we can play it in
this context in the club” - that sort of thing, where I think a lot of
producers might not have that relationship. He’s a great producer, so I don’t
know that he always gets enough credit for that.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
How does it feel like if you put something out on Mixpak? You make a beat,
record vocals, work on the arrangement, mix it and put it out on your own
label, so you have full control. And a situation like this, where you work on
a major label record with other producers, other people might have different
opinions? How does it feel hearing your music, which is your music in a way,
but again, it’s also other people’s music and might not sound exactly like
your vision was like when you started out making that track?
Dre Skull 
It’s an interesting aspect of the business dictating certain creative stuff.
Like you say, when I do something on Mixpak it’s pretty much something that I
have a great amount of control over. I mean, if I’m working with a vocalist I
don’t tell the vocalist what to say and that sort of thing.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
But you could always not release it.
Dre Skull 
That has happened. Sometimes with a vocalist we will have a conversation like,
“I think this song could be about this.” Whether it’s Kartel or Popcaan or
someone else, but a lot of times, probably the majority, I’m letting the
vocalist dictate that to me. I guess you have to ask yourself what you want
out of your own creative energy and output. I mean, if you are working in a
major label context there’s many different ways it goes down, but there’s
A&Rs who work for the label and a lot of times A&Rs, say, in the rap
world, are looking for beats. Then you have artist managers who might bring
the beat in. You might have a beat that in your mind was like a sketch of the
idea and it gets to the rapper and the next thing you know you hear it and
it’s released and you’re like, “But I was going to change the outro,” or
something like that or, “I would have flipped it a little different, or just
mixed it differently.” So, I guess you have to be aware of what kind of game
you’re playing and are you comfortable in that role, ceding some control? I
guess it’s on very much a case by case basis, and also you might not realise
that you have an issue with it until it’s too late, so it’s definitely a
learning thing. It’s a very personal thing that you have to learn your own
relationship with it.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Is that something that you see yourself doing in the future, doing the next
Rihanna album or something like that, or would you rather produce riddims and
record artists that you like? What’s the vision for moving forward?
Dre Skull 
I definitely want to keep working with artists that I really admire, that I
personally have an affinity for and have an emotional response to, but that’s
not to say that I wouldn’t want to work with a Rihanna or someone like that.
I’m interested in working at the highest level, essentially, not financially,
but just as a producer who wants to work with vocalists and songwriters. It’s
a great opportunity to be able to work with the ‘best’ songwriters, quote-
unquote, or the ‘best’ singers with great voices, that sort of thing. I’m
essentially actively pursuing both, a lot of stuff, like I’m doing this
Popcaan record. At the same time we’re bringing in some pretty major rappers
to do guest verses on the Popcaan record, but we do have a lot of control over
that. And yet at the same time, yeah, I have a bunch of different things in
motion with major labels that I’m not going to assume will all work out well
but that I’m happy to be pursuing that as well. But, really, I think if I was
just in one side of that, only doing Mixpak stuff or only doing major label
stuff, I don’t think that would be enough for me and I think by doing all of
it, or different types of projects with different levels of control or input,
it serves my different areas of interests.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
I think before we open this up to questions I’d love to play one more record.
(music: Tifa – “Champion Bubbler” / applause)
DAVIDE BORTOT
So, do you have any questions?
Audience Member 
Hey there, I don’t know if I can see you through this crowd of people, but
hey. I was just going to ask, when you’re getting into the room with a
vocalist, do you ever have occasions where maybe the vibe just isn’t there and
they’ll leave without recording something on top of the riddims you’ve made
for them?
Dre Skull 
Let me think about that. In Jamaica I’m just about always working with the
artists. Sometimes in the US I’m working with a top-line songwriter and maybe
the track’s going to be for someone to be determined or something like that. I
think it’s pretty rare that we leave the room without something. Sometimes,
obviously there’s been times where it’s been hard to get the vibe. In a lot of
ways, obviously I have less work to do in that moment, because I’ve made the
track, so sometimes the vocalist or the songwriter rather is just having a
mental block of some kind, or just they don’t care for the track and are not
responding to it, so I guess there’s been a few times. I think I did a track
with Popcaan called “Get Gal Easy,” and we did a session where he did “The
System” and this other track “So We Do It” and “Get Gal Easy,” so we were
going to do all three of those in a day. When it got to time to do “Get Gal
Easy,” which did not have that title because it wasn’t written, but he said,
“Let’s slink back tomorrow.” But then I got a text in the middle of the night
being like, “By the way, I recorded that.” So, for whatever reason, I don’t
know if he was hungry or he was tired in the moment, he was like, “Let’s come
back to that, but in the end he recorded to it.”
Audience Member 
Do you have a ritual to get the vocalists in the right mindset when you get
into the studio with them?
Dre Skull 
Well, it really depends. I would say not really. I usually let the vocalist
carry forth with whatever ritual’s going to work for them. I mean, usually in
Jamaica I’ve been working out of the studio that the vocalist is most
comfortable with, so it’s kind of like their home studio. So, that’s part of
their own ritual. I just would say, actually, if you want advice, ask the
vocalist, “How do you want to do this?” Recently, I was working with this
vocalist, a New York-based vocalist, Wavy Spice, and it was a studio that you
could walk out and get up on a roof deck. So, we just put the instrumental on
her phone and she took it up onto the roof away from me and just took an hour
and a half, two hours to herself, looking at the New York skyline, and wrote
it. I think, really, just giving the vocalist or the writer the opportunity to
make themselves comfortable, and really respect whatever it is they need to do
to get comfortable to write a song that they can connect with.
Audience Member 
Hi. I know you work with Lil Scrappy, you’ve produced a track for him and
released it on Mixpak. I was wondering if you could just speak a bit about
that.
Dre Skull 
That track process-wise wasn’t super different from some of these tracks I’ve
done in Jamaica. I went down to Atlanta and linked with him at this studio
called S-Line, which is this well known rap studio down there. He was
interesting. He actually is a super nice, humble, dedicated artist and he
shared a pretty interesting story with me, that he came up in the game writing
down his lyrics, having a lyric notebook, and then he met DJ
Toomp who was working
with T.I. a lot. And Toomp, I guess, convinced him to stop writing his lyrics.
He did a process similar to Kartel, where it’s like a dance between the
engineer and the vocalist and so the writing is happening to the microphone
live and it might be just bar by bar or a few bars at a time. But he was
explaining to me that for him it made the performance and the writing more
real, in his words. So basically, I think what he meant by that is, if he’s
reading off pen and paper, there’s a part of his mind that’s focused on
reading while he’s trying to rap and by just literally coming from his mind it
can be a more direct kind of performance. The other thing I noticed about that
is, it can really become about the sounds and the enunciation and how you’re
pronouncing different things, because sometimes it’s the way you say something
that makes something so catchy. The drawl or however you do it, the timing,
that might be the most important thing for the song. So, that was cool to hear
his take on that and to see it happen.
Audience Member 
They both come from the same camp, but what’s the difference between working
with Kartel and Popcaan?
Dre Skull 
Obviously, everyone’s an individual in many different ways, but I think
without saying anything negative about Popcaan, because he’s a great
songwriter and a great vocalist, Kartel I just think has had so many years of
writing so many songs that his understanding of song structure and of how to
do certain things... I mean, I’ll tell a little story about Kartel. He blew my
mind in a number of different ways, but he would do something where he would
often, say, it’s a hook, he’ll record bar one then he’ll skip bar two and
write something for bar three. Then he’ll go back and write bar two and bar
four, and so it’s like this weird filling in this puzzle. My take on that is
that there’s something actually subtly catchy about what happens when you hear
the lyric. You would never listen back and think, “Oh, that sounds like it was
recorded out of order,” but there might be something almost subconsciously
that’s more catchy about the recorded quality of that. Then also, it has
implications for the songwriting in terms of what words he’s choosing and
stuff like that. I think the craziest thing he did once, there was a 12-bar
verse in a song and he recorded bar 12, then he recorded bar 11, bar 10 and
literally recorded the entire verse, wrote it and recorded it, backwards. I
was just like, “What the hell is going on?” Because I’d never heard of
anything like that. But upon reflection I’m thinking, “OK, he knows lyrically
where this verse is ending up, so he can build a path to that end and likewise
with the melody.” So, there’s kind of a genius in working that way. I don’t
know that many people could do it even if they wanted to try to do that. So, I
really would say just the difference with Kartel is probably he’s recorded, as
I said, 3000 or 4000 songs. Popcaan has done a lot less. But as important as
that might be, that kind of experience, someone who’s recorded two songs might
write the most amazing song that’s ever been written, so it’s not a
requirement that you’ve had that experience. But I’d say with Popcaan, I think
he takes maybe a more measured approach. I should have on the previous
question mentioned that with the “Get Gal Easy” song, Popcaan took the
instrumental and put it in his car and drove around Kingston all afternoon or
all night, I guess, I should say. I definitely never saw Kartel take
instrumentals and live with them, but occasionally Popcaan will do that.
Again, whatever works for the vocalist. I like listening to music in a car and
you definitely might catch a different inspiration from that context.
Audience Member 
Just one other question about “Champion Bubbler” with Tifa. What’s the
difference between working with female artists in dancehall and male artists
in dancehall?
Dre Skull 
I’m not sure I’ve seen something that would stand out as a difference. I mean,
her process, in my experience, she likes to get the instrumental maybe the night
before and spend some time with it. And then she’ll come in with something
more fleshed out, maybe not done, but maybe a hook or some ideas, a hook and
one verse. She’s a good friend and a great vocalist, but yeah, I don’t know if
I could really tease out the differences on that.
Audience Member 
I think one of the most interesting things in your whole story is, you were
just doing music and then you saw a window, I guess, or something. Was this
like, rational? Did you, when “Yuh Love” happened and there was obviously a
different sound. I’ve never heard anything with a dancehall artist on top of
that sound like that before. There’s a room full of people and everyone’s from
a different country, from Argentina to whatever. I did my whole life like that
as well, I saw a window and I took it and I kind of think that’s how I got out
of Portugal or how I got into music and stuff like that. Was that a rational
thing, did you actually see it consciously? “OK, I made a different sound here
and I should push this button more often so I get more beats that sound like
this and do a little side road for dancehall or whatever and this is going to
be my signature thing.” Was that a [conscious decision]?
Dre Skull 
I think at that point it was probably more random than a very conscious
decision. Actually, that first track for “Yuh Love,” I hadn’t met Kartel. I
had actually sent a different instrumental to him and I think I waited three
or four months and every week it was like, “Yeah, yeah, he’s going to be
recording it this week,” endlessly like that. So, I was wondering, is this
really going to happen, and then after three or four months I got an email
saying, “You know what? You got to send something different.” So, I had the
riddim for “Yuh Love” on my computer and I polished it a little bit, so in a
way it wasn’t intentional.
Audience Member 
 I mean, it’s more like after you actually saw the result of it, was it
something you wanted to grab and explore?
Dre Skull 
I guess to a small degree, but maybe it was almost more unconscious.
Definitely, when I made that track I wasn’t thinking, “Oh, this is my take on
dancehall that’s going to be different than these specific ways.” There’s
certain differences maybe that people could tease out or talk about, but I
think it was just being true to where my head was at, at that time, in terms
of synth sounds or percussion or something like that. It wasn’t super
calculated, because I still don’t know what exactly I did or how I would
describe it.
Audience Member 
Thanks.
Audience Member 
OK, nobody’s asked this question yet so I guess I’ll just bite the bullet. The
Vybz Kartel prison break hoax, do you have any insight into the motive behind
that?
Dre Skull 
I do not. It was kind of amazing. We were getting contacted by financial
magazines in India wanting information, so it really became this crazy global
story. I have no reason to suspect that it was Kartel who created that story,
but at the same time I really look at Kartel and the way he handled his career
in the last few years as a conceptual artist almost, approaching it in a
really extremely contemporary, interesting way, so I would say he was very
good at manipulating the media to have constant stories about him. Every week
there’s a huge scandal. It’s hard to really understand just how seriously
these scandals would take hold in Kingston and in Jamaica. I mean, it was
headline news every week. Kartel got braces and he would say in interviews,
“Yeah, I just got braces just to mess with y’all,” just because that would be
a weird thing to do. And so he was constantly creating these stories and
creating this larger myth about himself. So, I wouldn’t be that surprised if
he participated in that, but at the same time it may have just been a blogger
who realised they would get a lot of traffic if they made that story up.
Audience Member 
These scandals, they don’t necessarily correlate with album releases or
anything, they’re just in order to keep his name in the public eye?
Dre Skull 
Yeah, I never had a deep conversation on that with him, but definitely not
related to album releases. It might have just been a way he entertained
himself. Maybe he’s naturally eccentric in certain ways and realised people
are responding to this, so I’m going to share this more with the world.
Thank you.
DAVIDE BORTOT 
Any other questions? No one? Good, then I guess we just wrap this up. Give a
huge round of applause for Dre Skull.
