Classically trained but equally inspired by electronic music, Francesco Tristano is on a journey that’s rendering the distinction between the two all but irrelevant. As a pianist who regards his instrument as a piece of percussion, it’s not surprising that his head was turned by the New York nightlife while studying at the prestigious Juilliard School. 
In 2011 Red Bull Music Academy lecture he goes in depth about his transition and why he sees no difference between the two forms, how he came to work with Carl Craig and Moritz von Oswald and why no recording of any track is ever definitive, just one version among many.
Todd L. Burns
I was stressing out last night, brushing up on all my classical music
knowledge. I wrote to you at 2:45 AM and said should we play some of this
composer, who I looked up in Wikipedia, or that composer. Then I thought to
myself, ”There’s so many versions of all these songs,” but then you wrote back
within five minutes saying, “Yeah, we should play these people, but I could
play them.” Why don’t we begin with you playing something on the Wurlitzer, something
old school, so to speak, that maybe sounds a bit new in your mind?
Francesco Tristano 
The Wurlitzer is missing a C3 and it’s out of tune, but I think it’s going to be okay.
Todd L. Burns
By the way, please welcome Francesco Tristano.
(applause)
(music: Francesco Tristano plays Orlando Gibbons / applause)
Todd L. Burns
Who was that?
Francesco Tristano 
It was a piece by Orlando Gibbons, English composer, mid-17th century.
Todd L. Burns
He was before Bach?
Francesco Tristano 
Definitely, about a century before Bach.
Todd L. Burns
What’s special about him in your mind? You have him on your bio, I think, or
it’s mentioned on your website as being a particular influence on you.
Francesco Tristano 
I love the harmonies. We tend to think of old music as being something different from new music, which it is by the standards of time, but by the standards of harmony and rhythm it’s not necessarily so. I think this sounds
like Plaid more than it sounds
like Bach, for the most part. It’s modal, it’s not following a tonal system,
it’s following a modal system and Plaid are using modes as well. 
It’s just that harmonic language that was always interesting to me from an early age on,
I just always loved old music. The problem is there was no piano at the time.
This wasn’t written for piano because there was no piano at the time. It was
certainly not written for a Wurlitzer.
Todd L. Burns
You make quite a point about things not being written for the piano. One of your first albums, your first electronic, so to speak, albums, called Not For Piano; a lot of pieces not for piano. Seems like a very important idea of taking things and putting them in the context of a different instrument and seeing what can
happen.
Francesco Tristano 
Yes, it’s a very good point. The piano, this is a beautiful instrument. It’s
huge, the design is so impressive and big, but the image we have of the piano
is the image of 19th-century music, maybe some high-scale salon, Parisian
style and maybe some wigs. I think that’s the wrong image. 
When the piano appeared about 1750, a little before 1740, it was such a crazy instrument that most composers didn’t want to use it. “Too big, it’s too crazy, I can’t do
anything.” Bach didn’t like it, he probably saw an early prototype that wasn’t
very good and he was, “That’s not for me.” 
I tend to like music that’s very
old-time, before the piano even existed, and very contemporary music where the
piano is no longer valid as an instrument, like techno, for example. So it’s this extreme
repertoire of playing the very old stuff and then trying to do something new,
but always with the idea that the piano is an instrument of the future, it’s
always been. 
It became in one century the most used instrument by composers.
While Bach didn’t want to touch it, not interested, about a century later
every hotshot composer was a pianist and was using the piano as the main
source of expression.
Todd L. Burns
But obviously, now that all these hotshot composers have used it there’s a lot
of baggage that’s been put upon the piano, especially within popular culture.
When you come to it, you hear it as this romantic, quaint, wig-wearing salon
thing. 
I read an interview with you once where you said you see the piano as a percussion instrument and I think that’s a big break in terms of your thinking. I wonder at what point you had that epiphany, that the piano is not
this romantic quaint thing; we can do all sorts of things. Was it very early
on? Was it an immediate thing?
Francesco Tristano 
I wanted to be a drummer, but I happened to have a piano at home, which was
probably a strategic move by my mom. But I wanted to play the drums, so I
suppose my first steps at the piano were trying to imitate the drums, sort of
playing clusters in the low register. There are pictures of me walking with my feet
on the keyboard. Eventually, I got a drum set and as soon as I was done with
the practising I went to the basement and played the drums for the whole
afternoon.
Todd L. Burns
Your mum made you put it in the basement?
Francesco Tristano 
Yeah. She didn’t get the drum set for me, though; it was my uncle.
Todd L. Burns
The cool uncle.
Francesco Tristano 
Yes. But the piano is definitely a percussion instrument by the mechanics of
the instrument. This is the same mechanics actually (points to Wurlitzer),
but we don’t see it. When you press the key there’s a whole mechanism where,
in the end, a whole bunch of back and forth, there’s a hammer hitting on a
string. We cannot really control that, it’s like the attack and the decay of
the piano is not changeable, it’s always going to be the same. 
There are a few keyboard instruments which emulate vibrato playing, sort of like the
clavichord, which I believe was Bach’s favourite keyboard instrument, where
you have an after touch. Like a nice synthesizer, you can press the key and
whatever you do with the finger, later you can hear it. The piano doesn’t react so it’s kind of a stupid instrument in terms of attack, because it’s percussion based. 
But the cool thing about the piano is you can create the illusion of many instruments. You can create the illusion of a string
instrument, you can create the illusion of a wind instrument, and of course,
you have the very instrumental keyboard sound, which you can bring out. 
This leads me to believe that, in fact it’s a synthesizer, you know? I was studying
classical music, I suppose, but in a non-classical city – New York is classic,
but it’s not necessarily classical – and I realized this could be some kind of
synthesizer. Especially, when I started going inside the piano and fiddling
around with the overtones, which is basically the resonance of a filter.
Depending on how much you press the string, you have an effect, which is like
cut-off. Then you have the pedal, which is like the release or the sustain. So
it really is some sort of ancestral synthesizer.
Todd L. Burns
Even though you said you haven’t had a normal classical upbringing to an
outsider’s view, you went to Juilliard, you did all the practising, you have
all these classical CDs out. Were your parents the typical taskmasters, you’re
practicing two, three, four hours a day when you were growing up? Were they
cracking the whip, so to speak, or was it something you immediately took to?
Francesco Tristano 
I wasn’t forced to do anything, I just enjoyed it very much. It took me a while to realize I wanted to do that, but around 12 or 13 I knew I was going to use the piano in some way, I wasn’t sure exactly how. 
I guess what confused my mother is that I always wanted to do something else. I was studying classical music but in my free hours I was improvising jazz and just trying to digest the real book, the chord changes and the choruses and stuff. And then I went to New York and I got into electronic music and I was, “That’s what I want to do now. That’s what I want to explore and try to understand.” 
By then jazz had already faded, I had a few jazz projects going but I dropped these
and then I got into turntables and mixing boards and gear. I really dipped into it, but always with the idea of combining it with the piano sound because I thought the piano sound could still be evolving. 
That’s something else about the very basic design of the piano – it’s a design that’s been evolving for 200 years. We think it’s always been the same for 200 years, but it’s not. In fact, I was in Japan this summer with Yamaha and I went out to see a Yamaha
factory. The technology used to fabricate a piano is just unbelievable.
There’s new models, new prototypes, coming out every year, new technology, new
mechanical instruments, new pedals; it’s a constant evolution.
Todd L. Burns
I remember you saying when you were recording your last album in Detroit that
you found a piano you liked very much and you had to wait many months for it
to become available for you to record the album. So every piano, like every
guitar, every whatever, sounds a little bit different.
Francesco Tristano 
A lot different, I think. The thing is it’s so big we can’t travel with our
instruments; only a very lucky few can do that. It’s half a ton, to put that
on a plane is complicated. In Detroit there was one instrument I thought could
be great for my album. Then I had to wait a year until it was available, or
until I was available at the same time as the piano. 
We brought it into Carl [Craig]’s
studio and Planet E became the piano auditorium for a week. I was so happy that I could get that piano, that was basically the
foremost inspiration for the album, the sound of that piano.
Todd L. Burns
How was it different to other pianos that you saw in Detroit? What was it?
Francesco Tristano 
I can become very geeky about pianos.
Todd L. Burns
Let’s do it.
Francesco Tristano 
OK. Fundamentally, Steinway is an
important brand. It has two factories – one in Hamburg, one in New York – and
the markets are strictly divided so you won’t find a Hamburg Steinway in the
US. Maybe a few, but it’s not current. The New York Steinway has a different
design, you can recognize it. It’s edgier by the keyboard, the Hamburg is
rounded off. It’s different in the bass register. I find the New York
Steinways to be much more slamming in the bass and for my music it’s what I
need. Like I said, a percussion instrument, I need the bass register to be...
Todd L. Burns
If you’re going to record at Planet E you’re going to need that.
Francesco Tristano 
Definitely because you have to fight against all the instruments in the studio, all the synthesizers, all the effects boxes. A good piano, you know right away. You play one chord and you’re like yeah or no. Sometimes you’re
stuck with a bad piano and you have to go with it, but not if you’re going to
record your album.
Todd L. Burns
Why were you in New York? How did you get there? For the first time, when you
were talking about discovering techno earlier.
Francesco Tristano 
I visited New York when I was a teenager, I was staying at a friend’s
apartment with my mom on the Upper West side. We were walking around, I was
playing piano, concertos at the time, and we walked by the Juilliard School
and I said, “This could be a cool place to hang out and study.” Three years
later I was accepted. 
The term conservatory, you want to conserve something, I suppose, conserve tradition, the luggage, you called it. There are also the
times after the conservatory, which is New York City. I did my studies
decently, practiced a lot, but then there was always the other part...
Todd L. Burns
You were a good student?
Francesco Tristano 
Yes, I was, I suppose I was. But for me, the main thing about being in a
conservatory is to try to be exactly the opposite of a conservative person. In
that sense Juilliard is great. Basically, there is one exam to get in and
one exam to get out. Once you’re in you do what you want. There’s a great
music lab, for example.
Todd L. Burns
It seems interesting that there’s one exam to get in, one exam to get out, but
it’s still so conservative. You can do whatever you want, but everyone’s not
really taking advantage, would you say?
Francesco Tristano 
Everybody is a relative term. I found some great people at Juilliard, I met my
piano partner Rami Khalifé. We teamed up for
the project Aufgang and he’s kind of my alter ego, we connect on many levels.
We basically spend our afternoons improvising. Once we’re done with the classes, we were listening to a lot of techno at the time and then we’d just go into a practice room and improvise for hours, but constant BPM sort of
thing. Some people walk by and go, “What’s happening here?” - and walk out
again. 
It doesn’t matter how conservative people are, it really doesn’t matter, because you’ll find conservative people anywhere, you’ll find them in jazz, you’ll find them in electronic music, you’ll find them in classical
music. For me, it was about trying to take in everything that New York City
had to give, not just in electronic music – in fact, electronic music is kind
of limited right now in New York City. Maybe it was a little better 10 years
ago.
Todd L. Burns
When did you arrive?
Francesco Tristano 
’98 to 2003 were my years.
Todd L. Burns
So right around the time that Giuliani was coming in, which was the tail end
of a really powerful moment in club culture in New York.
Francesco Tristano 
A sad moment, I suppose, in club culture because many bars and clubs had their
license revoked. So you couldn’t dance even though there was a DJ. I remember
in the East Village, a few nights out, pumping music, great vibes, then you
start moving and it’s, “No, no, you can’t dance. You can’t dance.” So that was
interesting that you put such a censorship on people, but also giving them the
music.
Todd L. Burns
But there were places you could dance. Where were the places that meant the
most to you?
Francesco Tristano 
A place called Vinyl, Danny Tenaglia, BeYourself. We never met, but I learned so much from his sets, that would go for ten, 12
hours. Vinyl didn’t have an alcohol licence, there was no alcohol, which as a
European in New York seemed completely extravagant. I probably was underage
anyway. 
But it was about listening to the sets and then trying to figure out what tunes they were. I realized Detroit techno was very prominent, trying to get the CDs, the LPs. I wasn’t a student at Red Bull Music Academy, I didn’t know how to do it so I had to do it on my own.
Todd L. Burns
Danny Tenaglia around that time was probably one of your best teachers. Ten, 12-hour sets, he’d be one of your best teachers because he had the time to play just about anything throughout the set. Disco, house, techno, all over the place. I imagine it was hard to figure some of it out. Were there people you
were going out with, or were you going up to the DJ booth to ask him? What was
the process? You said you didn’t have a Red Bull Music Academy.
Francesco Tristano 
I wish I did, I wish I was a student here, guys. Really. Sometimes I’d go out
with Rami or with some friends, sometimes I’d go out and just listen, not even
dance, just listen, try to understand the grooves. Listen in a new way,
because the way I think of music – and I still fight against this, in a good
sense, not a bad sense – I still separate the elements of harmony, rhythm,
melody, bass – basically layers of musical elements, whereas in electronic
music this is all very relative. It’s about sounds more than the notes, I guess.
Todd L. Burns
Is that some of what was immediately appealing to you? That you kind of
couldn’t tell, it was all jumbled together what was melody and what was the
harmony, it switched.
Francesco Tristano 
Definitely, because in a good techno track you can have harmony, which
basically functions as a rhythmic impulse thing, and it doesn’t matter what
harmony it is. I hear it and it could be something else and it still fulfills
its purpose, which is to give a rhythmic pulse to the track. 
I was always attracted to things that were on the opposite end of my spectrum. So I had to
get my way into it. But then, of course, people like John Cage already predicted this in the ‘30s, that music would no longer be notes and layers of bass and harmony and
melody, but it would be just sounds. Composers would be sound artists, he called them. This was from a lecture in 1938. John Cage was probably about 50 years ahead in the way we try to approach music.
Todd L. Burns
Why don’t we play a track, one of your renditions of an electronic track?
Three points to anyone who recognizes this. This is off Not For Piano.
(music: Francesco Tristano – “Andover” / applause)
That was Autechre, “Andover.” Tell me
some of the other things you chose to rearrange, replay. I guess the first
question would be what would you say that you did? Cover?
Francesco Tristano 
You said rendition. Extraordinary rendition (laughs).
Todd L. Burns
Most of them were Detroit techno tracks and that one was not.
Francesco Tristano 
But not unrelated. I chose these classics...
Todd L. Burns
Jeff Mills, “The Bells”, Derrick May, “Strings Of Life.”
Francesco Tristano 
It was basically to indicate what the album could be about. It was a piano
album, after all. It was the first time I published my pieces, but by
including a few techno classics and one IDM classic, I suppose, I just wanted
to hint at the direction of where the album is targeted. I wasn’t trying to do
a recollection of classics, I just included these pieces to say this is about
electronic music, even though I’m playing the piano. If you put “The Bells” on
then there’s no doubt about it in a way. 
I did a few versions of Carl Craig’s
music. I played “Technology” a
lot; I played “Technology” at Carnegie Hall,
which was nice because I think that was the first time Carl’s music was
performed at Carnegie Hall. In the same program I played Frescobaldi, which I
played yesterday night, a piece from 1607, and that was also the first time it
was performed at Carnegie Hall. 
So you see how sometimes the extremes meet up
in very concrete situations like that. How institutions target the programming
for just one repertoire and leave the extremes out completely.
Todd L. Burns
How did you get to the point in your classical career – you had a number of
things out on various classical labels, I saw – where you just say, “I’m just
going to add “The Bells” tonight”?
Francesco Tristano 
As pure provocation, perhaps.
Todd L. Burns
And who’s letting you do that, as well? You set the agenda and say, “I’m going
to play Frescobaldi,” and then the last minute you improvise and play “The
Bells.”
Francesco Tristano 
Usually, I do it the other way around. My teacher said, “Tell your best jokes
first.” I think my best jokes are my own stuff or the more electronically driven stuff, so I start with that and then finish with Frescobaldi. I think that’s a really nice way to discover old music in a new context. Like I didyesterday, the Frescobaldi sort of came out of my piece, “Hello.” 
There’s nobody who monitors this, nobody tells me what to do. The stage is a place of freedom and I like it to be complete artistic freedom. It’s not a place to be afraid of –
quite the contrary, it’s a space to go as far out as you can. 
The problem is with promoters, sometimes classical promoters have very strict ideas of what they want and sometimes you have to negotiate. You meet them halfway but you
also want to do your own stuff. But I always have great experiences with
classical audiences hearing, for example, “Strings Of Life” or Carl Craig’s
“Technology,” I think the audience can never be underestimated. 
I’m not sure about promoters, but you can’t put a listing of what audience is best.
Sometimes I’m so surprised by elderly people who come up to me after the show
and say, “What was this piece where you play inside the piano?” “Strings Of
Life.” “Does the composer know you played inside the piano?” “The composer
probably doesn’t even know I played this piece.” She was very shocked by that,
the lady. She said, “How does it work, how do you get the score?” “There’s no
score.” “Well, how do you do it?” “I listen and I try to do a version.” 
I like the term ‘version’ very much, more than ‘rendition,’ maybe. Everything is a
version, even the original “Strings Of Life” is just a version. There are
several original versions, then there is Derrick May’s original idea, which we
cannot capture because it isn’t captured in sound, it’s not captured on a
score. So the original “Strings Of Life” is a version, and it goes in circles,
a version of a version of a version. 
I think that’s exactly what the old
composers like Bach and Vivaldi and Frescobaldi did. They were great remixers of their times. Bach was a great remixer, he heard a theme he liked by some Italian composers, picked it up and used it in his own
music, didn’t even credit the original composer and just said, “This is my
concerto.” And it’s basically a remix. That’s one more analogy between the Baroque age and our times, which is definitely the age of the remix.
Todd L. Burns
Was “Strings Of Life” the first one that you decided to do on the piano?
Francesco Tristano 
I suppose so.
Todd L. Burns
What was it about that track that said to you, “I can do this” or “I have a
way in, this is the one”?
Francesco Tristano 
For one thing I’m sorry I missed the whole techno thing that was happening
late ‘80s, early ‘90s, I was too young. I got into it early 2000s, which was
OK, but the classics had already gone – not gone, but they’d passed. So when I
heard “Strings Of Life,” I remembered it but I didn’t know from where. ‘I know
this tune, but what is it?’ I don’t know how I discovered the title even. 
I think I went to one of Carl’s DJ sets and he played it, the melody was stuck
in my mind. Then I did some research and I remember I found this internet site
with cellphone rings and one of them was “Strings Of Life.” “Oh, so this is
it, ‘Strings Of Life.’”
Todd L. Burns
Did you use it as your ringtone?
Francesco Tristano 
No, I didn’t, I never downloaded a ringtone from any site. But I liked the
harmonies of that piece. When the harmonies are appealing I want to do something with it. It’s the same with the Gibbons.
Todd L. Burns
You’re a harmony guy.
Francesco Tristano 
(laughs) I’m a harmony guy. No, I guess I’m more of a percussive guy,
actually. When the harmony is surprising and the second chord of “Strings Of
Life” is really surprising. I don’t know if this is still on.
(plays “Strings Of Life” on Wurlitzer)
The transformation between the two chords is a world apart but in a very short
time span, and I suppose that’s what made me want to use it.
Todd L. Burns
I don’t know Derrick’s background as well as I should, but it seems like the
chord change of a non-composer would make. “Oh this sounds kind of nice.” And
someone who’s classically trained would never think to make that connection,
perhaps.
Francesco Tristano 
Maybe.
Todd L. Burns
When you played “Strings Of Life” did you immediately go into the piano at the
end? Or was that something that came about over time when you felt like you
had a handle on the piece?
Francesco Tristano 
I did play inside the piano already before I did “Strings Of Life,” it just
seemed like a cool ending to the version. Unfortunately, for the vinyl release
we ran out of room so we had to cut this part. So I suppose, when I play live
now it’s my revenge, I make that part especially long because I just love to
play. 
I had so much gear in the piano yesterday I couldn’t really reach into the piano the way I’m used to. When it’s clear you have such a range of sounds, all the metal and the wood, I wasn’t even getting there because I had
the computer and all the MIDI controllers. But it’s not on the vinyl, that
part is not on the original release.
Todd L. Burns
The label you release for, Infiné, it’s a
French label and it seems like one of few labels in the electronic world that
would be open to something like this. How did you get hooked up with them? Who
was the person you talked to at the label, what was the driving force behind
you going down this road?
Francesco Tristano 
It was one show in Paris, I think 2005, a show where I played a mixed program
with some very old music, some Bach. I think I finished the program with “Strings
Of Life” and after the show this guy, Alexandre Cazac, came up to me and he
said, “Your “Strings Of Life” is great. I’ve been wanting to set up a label
for some time and now is the time to do it.” So he introduced me to his team,
to Agoria, and I recorded the
first version of “Strings Of Life” pretty soon after that. Then the version on
my album was recorded a bit later, better piano, better settings in general.
Todd L. Burns
On the “Andover” thing we listened to you can hear some electronic stuff going
on in the background, all over the album in places. When did that come into
play, when did you start playing with software or other instruments, to bring
that into the fold?
Francesco Tristano 
A while ago I was always trying to expand the sound of the piano with keyboards. I loved people like Joe Zawinul, for example, watching these videos from the ‘70s...
Todd L. Burns
He’s the keyboardist with Weather Report.
Francesco Tristano 
Yes, but he was actually a classical keyboardist, then he was a bebop pianist
with Cannonball Adderley and then he met Miles and then he went his way. But
he never played with less than six keyboards or synthesizers and then there
were these pieces of furniture behind him, basically like furniture of sound.
A synthesizer in ‘72 was not just a keyboard: you had to bring the rack and
the rack was two meters high or something and I thought that was fascinating,
how you can switch sounds so easily and try to build your own language with
the way you combine the different sounds. 
At Juilliard there was a great music
lab with some amazing old gear. I completely fell in love with the Yamaha
DX7, which is very basic, version
1, and I started using that to make my own tracks while I was a student. The
idea to go beyond the piano... but it’s composition, production, the same thing,
whether you sit down at a table and write the music on paper or you’re at the
computer and you program it, I think there’s no difference. 
The difference is for me when I try to arrange it to perform it live and still play the piano in an attractive way for me, not just loop stuff. I love to play loops, I have no
issue playing the same thing over and over, as you might have noticed yesterday. But if you loop something real time, which is you play the same thing over and over, it’s so alive, much more than if I just press record,
then play and loop it. 
So on Not For Piano there’s a whole bunch of piano loops, but they’re all played out. The Autechre tune was edited down to about
six minutes, but it could be I play it for 20 minutes. Basically always the
same thing, then look for the good parts and cut them, edit it together.
Todd L. Burns
It must be hard to play loops over and over, but you say you find that quite easy.
Francesco Tristano 
It’s not about easy or hard, it’s just me, I love to play loops, I have no issue with it. Some people in Aufgang, for example, my band, Rami is like, “You play the loops, I’ll play the free stuff.” I have no issue with playing the same bassline. That’s the thing, if you program something you can record a one-bar
thing and then loop it and it’s going to be static, or you can actually
record, even MIDI, you can record the bassline, but record the whole track,
record it live, and if it’s a six-minute track you’ll play for six minutes.
That’s how I do most of my tracks, I play as much live as I can, I loop as
little as I can, rhythmic programming is a different thing because you also
need the quantize to be right. 
But basslines are so much groovier when they’re off, I think. They’re so much more appealing when they’re not always falling
on the same spot within the bar. If they move a little bit – we’re not machines, I think we’re not machines yet - but when I play the bassline, even though it’s the same thing, it’s going to move in time. I think it can only be beneficial for the track to do longer loops or to play them out live.
Todd L. Burns
Let’s play a track from Aufgang. You mentioned them a couple of times already. “Channel 7”?
Francesco Tristano 
How about “Sonar”?
(music: Aufgang – “Sonar”)
Todd L. Burns
...all fine record stores. That
was “Sonar.”
(applause)
That’s where Aufgang first played, correct?
Francesco Tristano 
Correct.
Todd L. Burns
So that was based off the memory of the first performance?
Francesco Tristano 
We actually wrote it for the first performance, one of our first pieces, 2005.
Todd L. Burns
Tell me about the freedom of having a drummer finally.
Francesco Tristano 
It’s great. The first version of Aufgang we didn’t have a drum set – it was
two pianos and electronics and that was it. After a year, Aymeric, the guy who was
doing most of the programming, was, “Guys, I want to use the drums.” He’s a
great drummer, he’s played with Cassius, a whole bunch of rap artists in France and
Phoenix, he’s also the drummer for Phoenix. 
As soon as we used the drum set... the first date was in Holland about four years ago, the energy was doubled onstage. It’s really the
drums that hold the thing together because we play without a click always, we just don’t like playing with a click. But we do have live MIDI stuff going on onstage, so Aymeric, the drummer, he’s on click, so we just follow him and he’s holding it together. So it’s really just freedom to have a drum set onstage, it really is.
Todd L. Burns
How did this start? You obviously wanted to do a project with Rami, you’re
friends from school, but what was the guiding principle behind the whole
thing?
Francesco Tristano 
I guess it took us a while to figure that out. The first album came together
after three or four years of playing together, composing, trying to find our
sound. Then we added the drums and it was a whole different thing after a
while.
Todd L. Burns
I guess that was the moment when you realized “we have something really.”
Francesco Tristano 
Yeah, but the compositions, the tunes, we were trying to make them so we would
be free. It was a live project first of all, the album took a while to come
together. The drum was one large leap in our sound, but most of the work we do
behind doors at the computer. 
We send each other files, Aymeric sends new
basslines, Rami and I compose the piano stuff on top. Then we record and send
it back and maybe get together. It’s complicated because we live in three
different countries so we don’t see each other so often, so it’s always a very
intense way of working. 
Now we have a space in Paris where we meet
occasionally and we just recorded our second album, so we’re working on that.
I think it’s different in the sense that this is really produced. The piano is
played live, the drums are played live, but all the rest is pretty much laid
out in the studio and, you know MIDI. 
I think the new album will be much more of a live feel. You’ll hear a few moments where it sounds more rocky, but that could be the
sound of the drums in general. As soon as a drummer gets out of himself...
because Aymeric, he’s like a machine, but he can also be like a rock drummer.
Todd L. Burns
Do you have to tell him to settle down sometimes?
Francesco Tristano 
Yeah, we do.
Todd L. Burns
Is it hard being in a band for you, coming from this classical background? How
do you negotiate that?
Francesco Tristano 
It’s a relief, a relief. When we’re together there’s this vibe that anything
could happen and we’re invincible. Whereas when you’re alone on tour, you
always have different projects, but you’re alone, travelling alone, preparing
alone, concentrating alone. To prepare with your brothers is a relief. We have
a good vibe. We had a small tour about a month ago and nothing could go wrong.
Todd L. Burns
You do a lot of collaboration anyway. You’ve worked with Carl Craig, you’ve
worked with Moritz von Oswald, sometimes together. Let’s talk about Carl first.
You went to see him DJ and met him afterwards, you said hello. I think Infiné
had introduced you two. Correct?
Francesco Tristano 
Yes, Alexandre, a year after we unofficially met in a club in Holland.
Todd L. Burns
What do you think was in Alex’s mind? because the story goes he said, “I think
you two need to talk for a while.” What do you think he thought was going to
happen?
Francesco Tristano 
For once, Carl remembered me because we went up with Rami. He said, “You’re the
guys who came up to me after the gig.” I said, “Yeah.” Alex didn’t have a precise goal, but he knew I was listening to a lot of Carl’s music. By the time I met him I knew all of his stuff by heart, and when I say by heart I
mean I could play all his stuff. 
So I was really into his music and I guess
about six months later I went to Detroit for the first time and we worked on
the “Melody” remix, that was the
first collaboration. The original piano takes from the melody were taken in a
classical way, so not necessarily closed micing but more ambient micing, and
Carl is like, “I can’t use those takes for my remix. You better come to Detroit and
we’ll do this again.” 
I went to Detroit and I re-recorded some piano parts, some bass parts. Then he made the two remixes and that was the first thing we
started working on together, Innerzone [Orchestra]. Then one thing big thing
was with an orchestra, which was called “Versus.” It has evolved since.
Todd L. Burns
I think the video’s still online of this performance in Paris where he’s on
electronics and you’re playing piano and there’s this enormous orchestra
playing stuff. Must have been pretty special.
Francesco Tristano 
It was a lot of work. I spent about two months arranging stuff for the orchestra; then we got a conductor, so he was on the project for a while. Then we had one week of rehearsals and it all came together, the day of the show,
really. For an orchestra to work with electronic musicians is not easy. 
Also there’s a whole bunch of technical things you need to coordinate, like the
sound. We play amplified, we play with onstage monitors, some had click tracks, I had click tracks for this. And the conductor had a click track, but he was dancing by the end of the show, he was onstage, he didn’t look like he
was conducting, he was just having a great time. It was a great experience and
to be repeated, definitely. 
We’ve evolved the project into other versions. In Germany this year we played a couple of shows where I conduct the orchestra
and we play much more freely now. It’s kind of a DJ set between Carl, Moritz
and I and at times the orchestra comes in and then goes out again, a
continuous mix of music.
Todd L. Burns
What’s the most surprising thing about Carl, having worked with him?
Francesco Tristano 
Surprising? I don’t know. He’s a great personality in that he doesn’t think
small, he doesn’t think techno necessarily. There’s some comparison to be
drawn with Miles Davis, who definitely didn’t just think jazz; he went beyond
that. It’s the kind of personality that’s so important for his or her own art,
but also for the artist around them who’s not doing the same thing. 
There’s only a few people who can do that. It’s complicated to make it happen. First
of all, if you start working with classical musicians you have to adapt your
language. You can’t talk about groove – they have no idea what groove means.
You can’t talk about the feel of things, it doesn’t make sense. It’s all
written out, it’s all notes on paper.
Todd L. Burns
So were you his translator? Or does he have that language now, can he speak in
those terms?
Francesco Tristano 
We all learned a lot in the process, but I was definitely some kind of
mediator between those two worlds. And the conductor did a great job of making
it happen with the orchestra. But it’s basically getting to know each other. Orchestra musicians are yet another special breed of classical musicians and
sometimes it’s really hard to make it happen. 
Also, I love to play loops and
orchestras hate playing loops. When they have one bar written and it says 268
times, they get kind of upset. After 100 bars they’re off by about a beat, so
I’ll stop the thing and say, “You’re off by a beat.” “Yeah, but I’ve already
played it 100 times.” “Yeah, you have 168 more to go.” (laughs)
Todd L. Burns
Moritz von Oswald has done some ‘not production,’ those other words he used to
describe what he’s done on some of the records. Was it the bachCage one where he was credited as enchanting?
Francesco Tristano 
That was Auricle.
Todd L. Burns
What does that mean?
Francesco Tristano
It’s a mystery, a secret. No, Moritz and I worked on a record a couple of times, one was Auricle. The last is bachCage, which he produced full on, no mystery about that. But Auricle / Bio / On came very spontaneously. I had a whole bunch of piano samples, there’s no live piano on this record. It’s
kind of a direct antagonist to Not For Piano, which is a piano record where
I play live. Auricle was the other end, there’s no live piano, only samples,
I did the mix inside the box. 
I basically had a stereo file, which sounded okay but I’m no sound engineer and I’m definitely no mastering engineer and I
counted on Moritz to make it sound good, and I think he did. 
So it was definitely more than a mastering job because a mastering job basically means EQing and maybe a little bit of compressing and that’s it. But he managed to feature some parts of the original and process them again, isolating several frequencies so the whole track becomes... he made kind of a 3D version of a 2D track. 
For bachCage he was very present from the beginning on. It was a
project where I played some music from Bach and Cage and a few pieces of mine,
very short. One of them we had the pleasure of playing yesterday with the students onstage. With Moritz, we set up the mics, we processed the music together. You can definitely hear the Moritz von Oswald touch on bachCage, more than on Auricle because he had more freedom.
Todd L. Burns
Can we play something from the bachCage where we can hear Moritz?
Francesco Tristano 
How about this one (looks through laptop, music starts and stops)?
(music: Francesco Tristano – “In A Landscape” / applause)
This is a piece from 1948 by John Cage called “In A Landscape” and basically
what we did is we had about 20 mics on the piano, of which we used just over half.
Maybe some were just regular in the mix the way they were recorded and the
other five mics went into a whole sidechain of processing boxes, the heavy
ring modulator, Moritz von Oswald delay and, of course, reverb and phaser. And
it’s all basically live in post-production. 
So I recorded the take live and
Moritz’s processing was done as a second layer. This for me is an important
record because it’s the first time I was not afraid to use these processing
tools for classical production. John Cage is not necessarily a classical
composer, but the label is a classical label.
Todd L. Burns
It came out on Deutsche Grammophon, which I think is important to note.
Francesco Tristano 
Also, if you go to a record store John Cage will be in the classical section.
It’s not the current thing to do to use ring modulators when you record a
classical piano album, but that’s exactly what I did for the previous album,
which was my music, Idiosynkrasi. 
Most of the pieces I played yesterday are on my second album, I guess my third album. But now there’s no return, I think I told you
this before. For me, there’s no difference now if I play classical music. When
I say classical, it’s really in quotes. 
I don’t even know what it means. I
think we use it in an anachronistic way because the word classical itself is
fairly recent. It’s about 150 years old and it was used to describe the music
before that. Now, 150 years later, we call music from even 50 years ago
classical. So classical is really the same as contemporary in a way. 
But, now for me there’s no difference; if I play music by a composer from another time
or play my own music, the sound of the piano will always be processed. Not always, but mostly, because I think it’s one way to evolve the sound of the piano into something else, in relationship to my own time. In rock productions, in techno productions, you use all these machines, but in classics or jazz you don’t. But there’s no reason not to.
Todd L. Burns
Why did it take you so long to get there with the classical stuff? Or was it
that the classical industry also had to get there to allow you to do something
like this for Deutsche Grammophon? You say this record is a breakthrough for
you, in a way, you felt like you passed through some place.
Francesco Tristano 
Like I say, my whole electronic education came after my classical education. I guess I didn’t know how to combine the two, but now I do. In fact, there’s no difference whether I play a piece by Bach or my own music. Why it took me so long, I think it’s just a natural organic process of trying to integrate all
the things I learned and trying to define my sound. 
As a pianist you spend a lot of time working on your sound analogically, it’s in your fingertips, it’s in the weight of the elbow and the arm and the back, it’s all important parts of how the piano is going to sound. But then the mics, they pick up something
completely different and when you send the mics into a processing box you get
something totally different but you get something personal. 
I suppose it’s about finding a sound that describes me best. I have no interest in playing the so-called role-playing game of classical music, where you interpret
something from the past in an old way. If I do it I have to do it in a new way
and using technology definitely helps me in that direction.
Todd L. Burns
It must also have been a big deal from the other side to have Moritz doing a classical record. Did it take some convincing at the record label? “I’m bringing my own guy in, just trust me.”
Francesco Tristano 
No, no.
Todd L. Burns
He’d already done the record, I guess, with Carl.
Francesco Tristano 
Yeah, he’d composed. He was in it from the start, we wanted to do this together and Auricle though is not entirely the same thing, it’s sort of a remix project, it’s not necessarily a classical playlist. But Moritz was totally excited to do it because I guess it’s some kind of challenge for a
techno or dub producer to produce music by Bach. 
I love these completely crazy ideas and Moritz, I wanted to go further than him. He said, “Maybe I’ll do something very light.” I said, “Moritz we want more of this ring modulator, turn it up, turn it up,” just to give it that special flavor. I was very
happy to play with you guys yesterday. The piece we did was a very short
excerpt – I say excerpt because it was cut down on the original record to one
and a half minutes. There is a remix by Lawrence. I don’t know if
you want to listen to it real quick.
Todd L. Burns
Sure.
Francesco Tristano 
This is also on Deutsche Grammophon.
(music: Francesco Tristano – “Tristano Introit (Lawrence remix)“)
Todd L. Burns
So that was Lawrence.
(applause)
For anyone that was there last night, they can immediately recognize the
little melodic riff there. I find it interesting that Lawrence, given the
chance to do a mix of a John Cage piece or a Bach piece, he chose you. Not
that you aren’t fascinating in your own right.
Francesco Tristano 
Yeah, I was happy that he chose to do “Introit.” I think of all my pieces as
some kind of work in progress. As I said before, every original piece is already a version of some previous idea that we cannot fully grasp because it’s in the head of the composer or the producer. 
Obviously, when you do a record there’s a lot of effort that goes into editing and mastering. Already the piece is going to sound different, a different shape, different structure. But then the remixing by other people is one more version, it’s a collaboration but it’s another version. I think what we did last night was a version,
probably my favourite version so far. I think we could’ve rolled another half
an hour or so. I’m still working on this piece, just as I’m still working on
“Hello,” the first piece I played last night. 
The composition is about five or six years old, but I keep trying to make it evolve and go other places. One
way to do it is with adding programming and sequencing and the other way is to
get other people to remix it.
Todd L. Burns
So how do you know when a track on Idiosynkrasia, say, is done?
Francesco Tristano 
They’re not. That’s the thing. We think when we bring out an album...
Todd L. Burns
They are. (laughs)
Francesco Tristano 
They’re not, those are versions. Those are the versions known as
Idiosynkrasia.
Todd L. Burns
So you just set a deadline that someone gave you. “OK, that’s the version I
can finish.”
Francesco Tristano 
I guess. But really, I want to make a point of this: it’s not when you bring
out a record that the music is done. That’s only the beginning of the music,
the beginning of the life of the music. Once you put out the record you
understand a few things you didn’t understand while you were in the process of
making the music. 
It would be too bad to sit back and say, “Hey that music’s
done. If someone wants to remix, that’s cool, but I’m not going to touch it again.” I think it’s just the beginning. When you bring out a record, we think
that’s the end. The media say it’s a good record or it’s a bad record, it’s
better than the last one or not as good as the last one. 
But actually, it’s
just one long process and each record is going to be related to the previous
one and a hint towards the next one. It’s basically just one long work in
progress. It’s definitely not definitive versions.
Todd L. Burns
It’s related to one of the things you said when I interviewed you about six
months ago, that all great composers find their own language, define their own
language. I wonder if you feel like you’re getting there, that you’re finding
your own language? Or is it just a work in progress?
Francesco Tristano 
It’s not up to me to determine whether I’ve found my language or not, but I
started this thing about 10 years ago, trying to combine the sound of the
piano with the sound of electronic music. Because I love both: I love the
sound of the piano and I love techno. 
I was under the impression that there’s still a lot to do and I still have this impression. If you can find some
idiosyncratic things about my music then I suppose that’s a good thing, but
I’m not done. 
Now I explore the same idea but in a more classical repertoire.
The next project could be completely different, more towards the future than
the past, but the aesthetic is still going to be the same. It’s kind of like a
sound research thing where you get ideas, you try to develop them, you bring
out records and they help you put a milestone in your own progress, your own
development. 
But in no way are they to be taken as the last word. So I’m
always a little surprised when the press say an album is a new thing and it’s
finished. I don’t think that way. Each album is one step in whatever you’re
doing in music.
Todd L. Burns
Bach and Cage seem unlikely bedfellows. In your mind, what was the connection and why did you want to put them next to each other on an album?
Francesco Tristano 
For one, it was my conviction that old music doesn’t have to be shielded from
contemporary music. In fact, contemporary musics, plural, because there’s a
lot of stuff. I like to put a juxtaposition of old and new but in a continuous
way. In fact, bachCage is like a DJ set with music by Cage and Bach. 
The first statement is that old music is actually a part of our language, we’re
going to hear it in 2011 the same way as we’re going to hear the latest techno
production. 
Then Cage and Bach definitely connect on certain levels. They’re both minimalists, definitely. Bach was one of the first great minimalists.
There’s something very, very similar in the way they write their scores;
they’re very basic scores, no indications, just the music and a title, maybe a
word or two. Bach doesn’t even write the word, just a title and the music –
that’s it. 
They connect on a rhythmic level, they use very definite rhythmic
forms, rhythmic patterns. Bach’s music, especially his instrumental music, is
all based on dance, baroque forms of dance that now seem completely out, like
the sarabande. Would you like to dance a sarabande with me? I have no idea how
to dance the sarabande. 
But I suppose 300 years ago people did know what a
sarabande is, just as we know what a house track is or dubstep or whatever dance you want to call it. 
John Cage uses these patterns and he’s very strict so the piece we listened to, “In A Landscape,” sounds like this dreamy thing, sort of ambient stuff, but actually the rhythmic structure is completely defined. I don’t remember exactly but it’s completely separated in several sections where the total amount of beats is the sum of the previous section.
It’s kind of a crazy organization of rhythm but it’s definitely comparable to
Bach. 
Last but not least, both are very spiritual in the sense that they are
abstract, and kind of universal. When I listen to music by Bach or by Cage I
don’t need any other information and it transports me somewhere. I don’t know where, but it’s a kind of feeling that I get, that they had a really high
understanding of humans. 
I don’t want to philosophize too much about this, but Bach/Cage,
four letters, also the same first name, Johann Sebastian Bach and John Cage.
So a few analogies.
Todd L. Burns
Before we open it up to questions, I want to ask you, you recently played at
Space, Ibiza with
Carl. Was it the first time you’ve played in a club environment like that with
the grand piano?
Francesco Tristano 
No, we already did Space with Carl the previous season, so it was a repeat. I
do play in clubs a lot, but it’s rare to have a grand piano. In fact, I also
did the closing party with Luciano at Pacha Vagabundos and we didn’t have a
piano, it was too complicated the stage was too small. I suppose Space is
easier.
Todd L. Burns
It has a very big stage.
Francesco Tristano 
It has a good stage and there’s space besides the DJ booth.
Pacha is more complicated because Luciano is over
there (points) in the DJ booth and it’s more crowded. I was about 20-25
meters on the opposite side and we barely saw each other, but it was all trying to connect in the music. 
I love playing in clubs. What I did yesterday
is kind of a hybrid thing. Usually, what I do is either I play a piano recital
in a seated hall, could be amplified, could have electronics, but it’s not necessarily beat-y or dance-y; or I do a techno live set for dancefloor in
clubs with keyboards. 
I usually have two or three keyboards plus my little machines and my computer. So yesterday was a bit of a hybrid because it was kind of a concert, but I was also playing more beats than I usually do in a
concert hall, because the soundsystem in concert halls is mostly not adapted
for ‘subby’ music, so you have to go easy on the speakers.
Todd L. Burns
Is there an ideal place? I saw people sitting down and moving in their chairs,
they’re not quite comfortable, and people standing up were maybe wanting to
sit down. Is there a place you feel is the ideal format to hear what you do?
Francesco Tristano 
To me, they complement each other very well and it’s vital for me to switch
and play in different environments. I think every hall is ideal as long as you
try to get it all out. When you feel the vibe and you can connect with the
audience, whether it’s a quiet audience sitting in chairs or a crazy audience
dancing as if there’s no tomorrow, it’s complementary. I love to go back and
forth. 
Also, these hybrid formats are very interesting, there maybe new
sensations, you don’t really know what to expect. In fact, I don’t know what to
expect. I know what I want to play but I adapt. 
I had some tracklist in my
mind before I started playing yesterday and it was completely changed
throughout the show because I was feeling it out. Of course, it all had to lead
up to the grand finale with the students.
Todd L. Burns
Speaking of students, does anyone have any questions they’d like to ask?
Audience Member 
I have two questions. First of all, you were talking about the history of the
piano. To my knowledge, when the piano was first invented there wasn’t a set tuning scale at that time, so people tuned to their own pianos. Have you
explored any different tuning systems at all or do you stick to the classic
12-tone system?
Francesco Tristano 
You’re right, it has only been formatted since Bach onwards. Before Bach there
were very few distinctive tuning systems. Tuning is a profession in its own
[right]. I can play around but I’ll eventually break the piano if I tune it
too much. 
But I have worked with tuners, crazy guys who are absolutely willing
to experiment with the tuning. You can get into antique tunings where the relationship of the intervals is specific to each key. So, for example, if I
tell this very special tuner I know, “Look, I’m going to play some music by
Frescobaldi and the keys are F major and A minor and C major,” he thinks for a
second and starts tuning. Every modulation is such a big event because the
relationship between the intervals is shocking. We don’t hear it that way. 
Or
you can go a completely different way, you can tune it with quarter-tones and
go into more traditional Arab scales or go into completely crazy tuning
systems. Everything’s possible but I can’t tune it on my own, I need a tuner
to do it for me.
Audience Member 
Thank you. Secondly, your exploration of electronica and piano or classical
music, you’ve said the word “techno” a lot. Does that mean that you’re really
only interested in working with a 4/4 beat pattern? The piano, like you’re
saying, is a percussive instrument, so you’re talking about complex percussive
things that interest you, but then when it comes to the electronic part the
producers you’re working with seem to stick to the 4/4 format. So do you have
any interest in doing something more complicated or different?
Francesco Tristano 
Definitely. I have no issue with doing the 4/4, I love it. But the cool thing
about having the four equal beats is you can do so much between the beats. If
you have a kickdrum accentuating every beat, what I do harmonically or on the
piano is pretty much syncopated. There’s so much space between the beats to
make the groove happen. So it’s not like a limit or anything, it’s just a
common denominator, just as in classical music you have certain figures like
alberti bass. I can show this briefly, something like this.
(plays Wurlitzer)
All over classical music you hear something like that and it’s always the same
but it’s always different. But I definitely like abstract beats and I’ve
worked with other people like Sutekh, who’s not into heavy four-to-the-floor.
I’m definitely also into sound music where there’s no beat at all. The piano
has these ambient properties where you don’t need a beat, you can just be
spacey.
Audience Member
I play drums and I feel that in the last 25 years all the evolution in rhythm
and beat culture has come from people who don’t play drums. 
That’s a common
perception among drummers, it’s electronic producers and programmers who’ve
evolved beat culture. Do you feel the same about harmony?
Francesco Tristano 
Interesting point. I absolutely agree with you, I think once we got machines –
not just drummachines, but also synthesizers – the way organic musicians play
has changed, absolutely. 
You said before that the very specific chord progression could be from a non-composer because it’s basically just playing
around and finding the chords. What I find interesting is that it becomes another language, it becomes a new kind of thing. Detroit techno, for example,
you hear a lot of pentatonic stuff. It’s laid out pretty easily because it’s
just the black keys, for example, but it becomes a very specific sound. And
the way you listen to it, I don’t necessarily hear it as a pentatonic scale, I
hear it as a new conglomerate of pitches that determine what the harmony of
the piece is going to be. I’m not sure how far I can go with the analogy. I think Carl Craig is a great harmonizer, for example, he’s got some great
harmonies. So is Mad Mike from Underground Resistance, he’s more from a gospel
and jazz background. 
But these evolutions, it’s not linear in that before it
was that and now it’s that (moves hand up a few inches). But it’s basically
a circle, we can go back and forwards. It just becomes a much richer harmonic
language, just as it’s become a much richer rhythmic language since the advent
of beat machines and stuff like that. So I think now it’s about amplifying
your field and we have to learn from each other. It’s only about this, I
think. 
But you’re definitely right, the beatboxing has changed a lot of
perception in rhythmic structure when it comes to organic drumming. And I
count myself among you guys because, like I said, I play the drums in the
piano, I like to play the drums.
Audience Member 
I have a couple of questions. First, that version of “In A Landscape,” where
and when was it recorded?
Francesco Tristano 
A studio in Berlin, August 2010.
Audience Member
Just that I’ve been listening to it for a little while and I don’t even know
where I got it, but the version I have on my computer is totally uncredited.
That blew me away when you played it, I’ve even sampled it a couple of times.
I hope that isn’t a problem (laughs).
Francesco Tristano 
You won’t have a problem with me, you might have one with John Cage’s
publisher (laughs).
Audience Member 
And second, do you ever see yourself moving away from the piano completely and
diving deeper into synthesized sounds, maybe even harmonic samples?
Francesco Tristano 
Yeah, definitely. Ultimately, all these projects to combine sound from
electronic and acoustic realms eventually will bring me further from the
piano. They already bring me further from the piano because I have so many
other elements to count on, more than the piano. 
I’m happy when I have a piano on stage because I feel at home and if my laptop dies or my MIDI controller
goes away, there’s no power or whatever, the piano will still sound. It’s a nice companion to have onstage because it will always sound no matter what happens. There can be bombs, it doesn’t matter, there will always be sound.
There was a piano sounding when the Titanic went down, I think. 
But yeah, definitely. Probably you noticed, I play the piano but I don’t play so much
and when I play a lot then it’s a loop, always the same. I’m not into soloing right hand and chorusing, it’s more of a minimalistic approach and I guess the
extreme end would be to not play the piano anymore. Not for now, but who knows, could be in the future.
Audience Member
What I noticed yesterday in the show is there’s quite a lot of emotional
content to the music, but there’s quite a lot of dissonance as well. Where
does that come from? What’s your interest in dissonance within that sort of
music?
Francesco Tristano 
Interesting question. I was reading some lectures by John Cage the other day
and he said the old way to compose was to discern between consonance and
dissonance and the new way to compose is to discern organized sound versus
noise, what he calls noise. It could be unorganized or chaotic sounds or
whatnot. 
The dissonance is only dissonant if it’s surprising. If everything’s
dissonant then it’s no longer dissonant, it just becomes consonant. So I do
like to work with simple harmonies, simple chords, major trials, minor trials,
sometimes a seventh. 
But then at some point I like to break it, I like to
break it, just as when you set a marker, you have a before and an after, so
once you introduce the dissonance all the consonant stuff before will be
transformed for the next part. The way I see it, I suppose, is very spontaneous and I can’t really calculate when it’s going to come in. 
But in
the programming there’s kind of a lot of dissonance because whatever I play at
the piano – and I say, I like to be as free as I can – when I play live I like
to play both hands. Sometimes you’ll see me EQ something and I have the right
hand still playing, but the consonance is in our ear, so to speak. 
But
nowadays in 2011 we hear everything different, we hear such a large range of
music and nothing is shocking anymore. The most dissonant stuff is not
shocking because we’ve heard it. So I’d like to go the other way, so if you
play a lot of pleasing harmonies and then you play something different it’s
kind of a shock. 
The first piece I played tonight, the Gibbons, it’s the same
way. It starts out pretty soft and minor-y, and then all of a sudden it goes
completely out. It’s not necessarily dissonant but it’s a progression that’s
not within the tonal structure of music and it’s a surprise. I like to create
new context for the way we listen to music, even if it’s old music –
especially if it’s old music. 
New music can’t really shock you anymore, old
music can. It’s difficult to shock nowadays, I don’t know the last time I was
shocked when I heard something. I think it’s refreshing to listen to the old
stuff. The piece I played yesterday was 400 years old and very dissonant at
times. It’s what gets me thinking, “Well, maybe this wall between old and new
is all an illusion.”
Audience Member
Thanks.
Todd L. Burns
Does anyone else have any questions? Well, thank you very much, Francesco.
