Celestial bluesman Gary Bartz caught up with Jefferson “Chairman” Mao after a performance the night before featuring former Academy participant Aloe Blacc and singer Bilal. This session took place during the Red Bull Music Academy’s “New York City To the SF Bay” lecture series in San Francisco, with Bartz discussing everything from playing with music’s greats to why he doesn’t like the J-word.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
He’s a musician, band leader, composer. He’s worked with some of the giants of music: Miles Davis, Charles Mingus, Max Roach and many may others. And his music has crossed boundaries and genres as well as generations. So won’t you please join me in welcoming Mr Gary Bartz.
[applause]
Gary Bartz 
Thank you.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Terrific show last evening.
Gary Bartz 
I had so much fun. I really needed to do that. People probably don’t know but
my mother had passed away about a week ago. She was 97-years-old. She was the
one who had the most faith in me and my family about music. She said, “Oh no,
he’s going to be a musician.” My dad said, “We don’t know about that.” She
kept on so she was my inspiration and last night was the first I’ve performed
since she passed and so it was real special. I’ll always remember that.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
The feeling was definitely special in the room. Was that your first time
collaborating in performance with Bilal and Aloe or had you guys done stuff
before?
Gary Bartz 
The first time with Aloe but Bilal and I are involved in a project that Jill
Newman Productions is working on and so we’ve been doing things through the
last couple of years and so it’s a growing project but it’s a project that
we’re really proud of.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Rightfully so. Seeing as we had vocalists working with you and the performance
last night, usually I like to start these things out with a little bit of
music. Even though we didn’t all have the experience of the show together last
night so just to get everybody refocus and set, I know there’s a lot of talk
this morning. I’m going to play a little something from Mr. Gary Bartz to get
us started here.
(music: Gary Bartz – “Music Is My
Sanctuary” / applause)
Gary Bartz 
Thank you.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
For anybody who may not be familiar with that song, what was that we just
heard?
Gary Bartz 
 “Music Is My Sanctuary.”
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
This is what from year was this recorded?
Gary Bartz 
Let’s see, I think that would have been around ’76 somewhere around there,
’76, ’77.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Your career has, as I said earlier, spanned many years in different styles.
What do you recall about creating something like this? This is a “rare groove
anthem.” It’s one of these recordings that has really been championed by a
whole generation of DJs both here and the UK for many years. I don’t know if
it was received that way upon its release but it’s certainly in the years since
become an anthem for people. What do you recall about even just the process of
making this?
Gary Bartz 
I had been working with the Mizell Brothers on some
of Donald Byrd’s records and I thought that was a good marriage. I enjoyed
working with the Mizell’s and so I asked him when I signed with Capital
Records, I wanted them to be the producers and then so they also wanted to do
it. We continued working together and Syreeta. I loved Syreeta from the first
time I ever heard her voice.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Syreeta Wright?
Gary Bartz 
Syreeta Wright, yes. I was happy to have her going to the recording and it was
a time I had moved to LA in 1974 so that was an LA time, I still love LA. I
love the West Coast. It’s warm. When we left to come out here a couple of
days ago, it was ice on the ground and snow so I always love that. That
recording was a very happy time and initially because to me music is my
religion. I tell people I’m a born again musician and so that was very
important but I couldn’t come up with a word. Initially, music is my religion
but that doesn’t sound so good. Someone suggested, “How about ‘sanctuary’?” I
said, “That was it. That was the word.” Yeah, that was a good time.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
What was that process like with the Mizell’s? I mean, Josh had mentioned them
earlier and some of you guys might have been at that session that happened in
LA a year or so ago. What was their vibe like? What was it about them that
made you trust their putting this album and other recordings in their hands?
Gary Bartz 
Their process was more or less where we’d go by the house and we just work on
music all day so it was a loose kind of thing. Somebody would be maybe in the
kitchen and somebody would end up at the piano and start a groove or start
something and we’d say, “Come in and you hear this. What do you think about
this?” The same thing in the studio, a lot of time, I would be a little upset
sometimes, because I’m used to when I go into the studio I’ve got the music
already. I’ve written it down, I’ve rehearsed it and everything and a lot of
times, we would go out and go in the studio with them and they would just have
a kernel of an idea and we would work on it in the studio and I would always
say, “Man, we need to work on this before the studio time.” We’re paying for
the studio time here but it always came up good.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
It’s funny you mentioned that because some of the other recordings from
earlier in your career, you know, which we’ll get to in a second, they all
seemed to be very well rehearsed and performed live. Maybe some of the things
for Milestone, which are
in the traditional, I don’t want to use the “J” word, we’ll get to that in a
second as well, but that traditional instrumental ensemble going in and just
sort of cutting it start to finish. Was it difficult to adapt to that and how
where you able to adapt because your music has, as I said, adapted so well to
these different forms?
Gary Bartz 
It was a little difficult at first because I didn’t understand their process
but that’s how they worked and it worked for them, you know, so I just went
with the flow. We had a little difficulties every now and then but it worked
out in the end so, I said, “Well, let me go with it.”
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Right. In the lecture that you did in Barcelona, if for those who don’t know Gary was a lecturer at the Academy in
Barcelona in 2008 and Om’Mas and Emma Warren, who moderated the discussion with you spoke a little bit about
your aversion to a certain word. Om’Mas described you as a musician as a blues
man and I wonder if you might elaborate on that a little bit. The category for
the show last night was the four letter word J-A-Z-Z.
Gary Bartz 
Was it?
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I believe so. I saw it on printed material.
Gary Bartz 
Good thing I didn’t see that.
[laughter]
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Maybe you could share some of your views on that.
Gary Bartz 
I moved to New York in 1958, I was 17-years-old. I’d go to Juilliard and then
learned its music and I was fortunate enough to have met Max Roach in ’54. I
guess I was about, what, 14-, 15-years-old something like that and so we
struck a friendship and when I moved to New York, he looked out to me. He and
Abbey Lincoln would invite me by the house and have dinner. I remember I told
Abbey that one time not too long ago before she passed. I said, “Do you
remember what you used to cook?” She said, “I used to cook?” She didn’t even
remember that but we had many discussions and he was totally against the word,
the “J” word. I don’t even like to mention it because at this point it’s such
a negative word. It means nothing. And to me, in my opinion, they ask me,
people ask me, “What do you call it?” “I call it music.” You cannot argue with
the fact that it’s music. You can argue that it’s this or it’s that. You can
get an argument but when you say music and we don’t need to go any further. I
don’t need to go any further. Either you like it or you don’t. In doing research
Duke Ellington hated the word. Miles didn’t use the word, most musicians and
this is from time immemorial, I guess, they don’t label their music. We
don’t have time to label the music. We’re creating music so if you’re labeling
it under a certain name, then that stifles you because you have to go with
whatever that category or whatever people think that category is. I don’t want
to have those shackles on me so it’s just music. And most musicians, I was
around a lot of guys, I was very fortunate from Coleman Hawkins, Roy Eldridge,
you name it, none of them used that word.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
It has something to do with some of the negative historical connotations of it
as well?
Gary Bartz 
It does. Yeah, because it’s a curse word to begin with. It started in the
whore houses of New Orleans and people would say, “Well, I’m going down to the
jazz. I was getting me some jazz.” I mean, I’m going down to get some pussy
and going in or even say, “Did you fuck that woman?” They would say, “Did you
jazz that woman?” The music was being played in those places and so when
someone would say, “What kind of music was it?” Said, “It was jazz music. Fuck
music.” It’s a negative word and for me, negative words bring negative
energies so that’s why I’m against it.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
You just mentioned moving to New York. Where did you grow up?
Gary Bartz 
I grew up in Baltimore, Maryland, which was at the time a segregated city. My
mother couldn’t try on clothes in the department stores if I was with her. She
was actually light enough, she could have passed but if I was with her, she
couldn’t try on the clothes so I didn’t go shopping with her much because she
wanted to try on the clothes. Schools, I went to all black schools until they
desegregated schools in ’54. It was a good music town though. There was much
music. I do have a lot of negative memories from that time period because it’s
being a Libra. It’s unfairness on justness, something that I can’t take too
well.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
When did you decide you wanted to become a musician? When did you decide you
wanted to pick up the saxophone?
Gary Bartz 
When I was about 6-years-old, I heard this record of Charlie Parker. Now, I
didn’t know what it was. I didn’t know what the instrument was. I just knew it
was the most beautiful thing I’d ever heard in my life so I told my mom and
dad, I said, “I want to do that whatever that is.” I found out it was a
saxophone so I’m begging every year, every Christmas, “I want a saxophone.”
“What do you want for Christmas?” “A saxophone.” “Ah, you don’t want no
saxophone.” You’re too little, the saxophone was then about the same size as
me, but finally, when I was 11, they got me a saxophone.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Was it because of Charlie Parker that you chose the alto?
Gary Bartz 
Yeah. I had never heard anything like that.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Your father also at a certain point later in life opened up a music
establishment.
Gary Bartz 
I saw that “J’s” getting ready to pop out there.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I don’t know. I’m trying to keep on top of our first conversation.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah. He worked on the railroad most of his life. He was a railroad person but
in 1960, he and a couple of friends of his opened up a night club and that I
had somewhere to work.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
At that point, you were already at Juilliard?
Gary Bartz 
I was already in New York, yeah, but I actually joined Art Blakey & The
Jazz Messengers from his club. They were working at the club and he found out
that his saxophonist was leaving so he called me in New York, he said, “Why
don’t you come down and sit in. He’s looking for a saxophonist,” which I did
and joined the band right there.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Whose seat did you take?
Gary Bartz 
John Gilmore.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
John Gilmore, okay.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Any Sun Ra fans out there?
Gary Bartz 
Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Okay. Can you describe a little bit about New York, coming to New York at that
time? I mean the Academy is happening in New York this fall. It must have been
a pretty exciting time for you. Early ’60s, the music, your musical heroes are
working constantly, you’re at Juilliard. Can you set the scene of what your
routine was like to go out enjoy the city and experience music?
Gary Bartz 
Like I said, I was 17 when I first moved to New York so I really wasn’t
supposed to be in the clubs but it was kind of lenient. We knew how to get in
and I remember when Tony Williams moved to New York, he was 15, so he really
had a problem. I just saw this interview with Sonny Rollins and Tavis Smiley
did an interview with him, and I never knew this, but he said they used to
paint mustaches on so they’d look older so they could get into clubs but we
never did that. We would take musicians instruments in. I’d take a snare
somebody would take the cymbals and that’s how we got in and the other way we
would just walk up to the box office like we were supposed to be there. “Hey,
how you all are you doing here? I got to get in there real quick. I’m running
late.”
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Besides the clubs, you’ve mentioned the loft scene. Was that around the same
time or was that later?
Gary Bartz 
That was a little later, yeah. You know it’s a funny thing, when I moved to
New York, it was the most exciting. I mean music everywhere. Clubs in every
borough and I was just taken aback, and the older musicians would always say,
“It’s not like it used to be.” Damn, it must have really been something. They
remembered 52nd Street and that particular era which I missed that. Moving to
New York in ‘58 that Charlie Parker had just passed away three years previous
so that energy was still alive so it was really a good time. To this day, now,
I find myself young musicians come to New York and now I’m saying, “Well, it’s
not like it used to be.”
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Where did you live in New York?
Gary Bartz 
I lived in Harlem. Actually, I had a room in a Jamaican family’s apartment on
152nd and Broadway.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
One of your band mates, Justin, lives right on that like a 150th and Broadway
he was telling me earlier today so.
Gary Bartz 
Who?
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Justin, your drummer.
Gary Bartz 
Justin, yeah. He’s from Harlem, yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
What has Harlem like back then?
Gary Bartz 
A lot of energy, lots of energy. Club Barron, Small’s Paradise was still open,
Count Basie’s. As a matter of fact, I did an engagement one time with Max, a
real famous engagement with two bands but a lot of people didn’t know that
Count Basie had a club, at least it was in his name. I don’t know how much he
had to do with the running of it but I was working with Max Roach and the
other band was Miles Davis so I mean you couldn’t get in that place. We were
there for ten days.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
What was your schedule like? This was after Juilliard or still in Juilliard?
Gary Bartz 
This was after Juilliard. Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Okay. Pretty much the life of a musician in New York City, early ’60s. Every
night a different gig?
Gary Bartz 
Yeah. Always somewhere to go and lots of jam sessions too. I knew Freddie
Hubbard. Freddie moved to New York in ’58 also, which I called that whenever
you moved to New York, if you’re not from New York that’s the class, so I was
the class of ’58 and so was Freddy Hubbard, moved in August of ’58. I moved in
September of ’58. We met each other kind of early and we’re used to doing. And
the funny thing is, the reason why wanted to go Juilliard was because I was
totally an ear musician and I think that’s the proper way to learn music is by
ear. Any other way is backwards because I mean from Mozart to Beethoven, they
were writing songs at the age of three. They didn’t even know how to write
their names so they couldn’t read music so it was totally by ear. And ear
comes first, it has to because you have to hear something first, say, “Oh, I
heard it,” and then it comes down. What happens is nowadays, kids go to school
and they’re learning music but people have already worked the music out for
them. You know, they’re looking at the paper. We worked it out for ourselves
and when you work it out for yourselves, you have a better understanding of
it. I forgot what the question was.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Just the regular sort of routine for you as far as gigging and things like
that. You wound up joining like as you said Art Blakey’s Jazz Messengers. Who
were the other leaders whose bands you joined in that ’60s period?
Gary Bartz 
Let’s see, I must say I had the pleasure when I worked with Art Blakey, Lee
Morgan who was one of my teachers and one of the great musicians of all times,
as far as I’m concerned. My mother would always say, “I don’t care what
anybody says, Lee Morgan is my favorite trumpet player.” [laughs] He was one
of mine too but I worked with Mingus. I had the pleasure of working with
Charlie Mingus, who had a workshop at the Village Gate every Monday. It was an
improvised big band and so there was no music. That’s where I met Eric Dolphy
and Rahsaan Roland Kirk, they were also in the saxophone section and so Mingus
would start a song with the bass or with the piano. He played piano also and
he would come over to Eric who was the head of the saxophone section and he
would whisper something, you know, hum something in his ear and then Eric
would play it and give it to us and then Mingus would give something to the
trombone players. That was the first time I worked with Mingus. I worked with
them later on too.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
What did you learn do you think from Mingus working with him? He’s such a
legendary character as well as musician with a very tumultuous life.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah. Well, you know, working with almost every musician, I learned something
from everybody. I learned something from people, you know, like people would
ask me who I was influenced by. I’m influenced by life and everybody because
somebody, I might have a friend, not a musician, but they may have a little
something or a quirk that they do or they say and that ends up in the music so
you take from everywhere.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I would imagine that those experiences became very useful for you when you
became a leader of your own group. How were you able to make that transition
from playing with all these other great band leaders to being a band leader
yourself?
Gary Bartz 
Because I think I watched how each band leader ran their particular band and
so I’m making decisions along the way, I’m saying, “Okay, I’m not going to do
that.” I learned a lot of things working with Art Blakey but they were things,
like I said, “Okay, I’m not going to do that. When I have a band, I’m
definitely not going to do that.” When I worked with Max, a lot of positive
things working with Miles. To me, Miles and Max were the best leaders I ever
worked for.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Why?
Gary Bartz 
Because they cared. They cared so much like Miles, you could almost do
anything. If he wanted you in his band, you’d be in the band. You could go out
and rob a bank and you end up in jail. He would come down and bail you out.
“We got a gig next week, man. What’s wrong?”
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I would imagine also with Art Blakey, I don’t know if anybody here is familiar
with Art Blakey’s Jazz Messengers but that’s kind of a group that produces
musicians to be… It’s kind of a transient group in a way because Art Blakey is
the only constant as the drummer and he always is able to bring in this young
musicians and they become famous band leaders in their own right afterwards.
Gary Bartz 
In a way, yeah, the thought just crossed me. In a way he was like a Norman Connors, only he really could play. I mean, not that Norman couldn’t play but
he was more of a producer. I look at Norman that was his genius. He was a hell
of a producer, still is.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Now, before we get back to a little bit more music. As a leader, can you
actually talk a little bit about the loft music scene in New York in the ’60s
at that time because I think a lot of DJs in this room, the loft in New York
connotate something of a different generation of the underground disco scene
and yet there is a precursor to that in a way in which you guys experienced?
Can you explain where those lofts were? What was the scene like? How long did
you stay for? What did you do?
Gary Bartz 
A lot of musicians started running lofts because the rent was cheap. Some of
the lofts were as big as this and you could play at anytime the day and night
because most of the lofts in the building were businesses which would close
down at 5 o’clock in the afternoon so we could go there and just play. I
remember Kiani Zawadi had a loft at Allen Street and I remember taking out a
grand piano, it wasn’t a grand, it was a huge upright piano, taking that up
about four, five flights of steps in this loft and that was hard. We would go
by his loft and one time Grachan Moncur had acquired all of the lead sheets to
Thelonius Monk’s music and so we said, “Oh, we got to learn his music.” We
went up to the loft. We stayed there for about three or four days. We chipped
in, buy food, cook, sleep, get up and they were always drummers and bass
players and pianist and horn players coming by different times and so we would
stay there and work on the music and learn the music and so it was that kind
of community.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Yeah, a real communal experience. When you became a leader, what was your mind
set? Was it just to record and perform your own compositions? Was it to push
the boundaries of what you were doing as a sideman for these other bands?
Gary Bartz 
I guess when you become a leader, you want to get your own musical ideas out
and so, I mean, I had compositions working with Art Blakey. Actually, my first
record date was with Art Blakey and I’d... what a lucky man I was in because my
first record date had Lee Morgan and Freddie Hubbard. I said, “Oh my god.
Can’t get any better than that.” But that was because Lee was a little erratic
during that time so we had just gotten back from California and Art couldn’t
find Lee and so he called Freddie Hubbard just in case. So they both showed up
and so they both ended up on the record date.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
But primarily to record your own material?
Gary Bartz 
Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
You recorded, I think, two albums as a leader or three albums before you
formed the NTU Troop.
Gary Bartz 
Right. Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Can you speak a little bit about what Gary Bartz NTU Troop was, this
particular band of yours as a leader?
Gary Bartz 
Right. That particular band, to me, the concept was I wanted a band that we
could perform anywhere. We could go out in the middle of the jungle and
perform so that meant no microphones. That meant no pianos. It was all
acoustic and so that was the whole concept and NTU Troop to me was everybody.
It wasn’t just the band because in those days we would play at places like The
East in Brooklyn and the audience would bring the instruments. They’re sitting out
there and as we played they were banging and playing tambourines and cow bells
and different things. It’s funny because I can remember my mom and dad when I
was a kid, they would go to Atlantic City and they would bring these souvenirs
back and there was this one thing that was a stick with a wooden ball and I
said, “What the hell, what is this?” They would bang. They used to do that
then. That gave me the idea of asking people bring your instruments.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Can you explain NTU, the word NTU and what that signified?
Gary Bartz 
NTU was like a suffix from the Bantu language in Africa in West Africa. The
English pronunciation is “Bantu” but they pronounce it “Ba-bintu,” everything
“Keet-ntu.” The suffix encompassed all of the arts of whatever the
philosophies that you had were. So I just used the suffix itself.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
The first two Gary Bartz NTU Troop albums, Harlem Bush
Music,
is that correct or is there one before that actually?
Gary Bartz 
The first one was a live recording at a place in Baltimore. Baltimore used to
have organization called the Left Bank Jazz Society, which I became a member
of before they became that, before that, because it had been a segregated
city. The first organization that precursor was called the Interracial Jazz
Society, which musicians said, “Well, we don’t like that.” They ended up
changing it but it was because the races were mixed and Baltimore didn’t come
from that. They came from a more segregated thing.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
So that album was the first NTU Troop album.
Gary Bartz 
Right, with Woody Shaw, Rashied Ali, Bob Cunningham and Albert Dailey were on
that. Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Harlem Bush Music, two separate albums.
Gary Bartz 
Right, which actually it was supposed to come out as a double recording, and
record labels as they can be sometimes, decided they didn’t want to do that
but it was all recorded at the same time.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
The music, of course, speaks for itself regardless. I find these to be really
beautiful and fully realized musical experiences. And let’s play a little bit
of something from one of these. We heard something actually last night, Aloe
performing with Gary. I don’t know if we should go to that right now. Should
we go to it right now?
Gary Bartz 
No, you pick.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Pick a different one maybe.
Gary Bartz 
No, you pick whatever you think.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
All right. We’ll try something else. This is something from one of the Harlem
Bush Music recording sessions.
(music: Gary Bartz NTU Troop – “Uhuru Sasa” / applause)
Gary Bartz 
Thank you.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
What goes through your mind when you hear that now?
Gary Bartz 
That was the Vietnam War was going on. They felt like I would make a good
soldier. I didn’t think so. That’s a protest song. I remember that time. I was
ready to either go to jail or leave the country as something I wouldn’t… I
don’t believe in war. Call me funny or whatever but I lost a lot of friends. I
lost family through wars. I was feeling that there’s a lot of music and to me,
music can work in different ways so I started trying to think of other ways
that the music could work especially in the community. It’s funny, I just
found out about a month or so ago, someone was telling me, well, “Almost every
Black Panther family had that album.” I said, “Well, good.” That made me very proud. [laughter]
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Also, Andy Bey, the vocalist on this.
Gary Bartz 
Yes. Great Andy Bey.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
What can you tell us about him and the experience of working with him? How did
you guys come to work together?
Gary Bartz 
I’m not sure. I don’t remember when but seems like I’ve known Andy forever,
but I remember Andy & The Bey Sisters. I don’t know whether you remember
that group. He was the little kid and the band but he was the talent. He
played the piano and sang and his sisters sang with him. Then, we did an
album, Members, Don’t Git Weary, Max Roach album that Andy was on, and he gets mad
when I say this, but I knew I wanted a vocalist and Leon Thomas was a good
friend of mine. But Leon had just done this Pharoah Sanders record and I
didn’t want to sing like I was copying that. So I started thinking, “Who could
I use?” I thought of Andy. I guess we saw each other somewhere and I said,
“That’s the guy and it was the right decision.” I tell everybody he always is,
“I wasn’t even your first choice,” but he was the best choice, I think.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
He was the best choice, and I think just from a musical listener’s
perspective, where his voice in the range of frequencies filled the space
within the band, I think was one thing. Also, you contributed vocals to a lot
of these songs as well, which was, I guess, a new thing for you at that time.
What made you step out to also do that?
Gary Bartz 
Like I said, I wanted everybody, I wanted the audience to sing, I wanted
everybody to sing. That was part of the community and a communal thing. The
NTU Troop was a communal band. We survived working a lot of the black student
unions and all of the universities around the country, as diverse as Notre
Dame, many big universities and small universities. I guess they don’t have
that like they did. I had a conversation with someone not too long ago. I
guess they still have the union, the black student unions, but they’re not as
vocal right now in the communities but Andy was and he still is. As a matter
of fact, the song that we do on my latest album that Andy sang, it’s the music
of John Coltrane. He sang “Dear Lord.” Friend of mine wrote some beautiful
lyrics and so he’s still doing it.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I wonder what your view is. This Harlem Bush Music era so informed by the
times having gone through segregated Baltimore as a child, the Civil Rights
era, seen all these different things. When you speak about different unions,
not necessarily being as active today, to me, the music is timeless because we
still do with all of these issues. When I listen to this music, it’s such a
spiritual thing. It takes me and so many other people somewhere and yet it
still really resounds because of what’s happening now. Yet, why do you think
that energy may be missing from what folks might be doing now on the same
level of how it was then?
Gary Bartz 
I’m not sure if the energy is missing, as I think energy is directed in a
different direction right now.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Maybe the urgency, not the energy necessary.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah, but when you see the Occupy Wall Street, that to me is going along the
same type of thing because we protest. We came from the Martin Luther King
marches and all of that. Malcolm X, I used to follow Malcolm X around. We knew
where he would be every day. At about 4 o’clock, he would leave the newspaper
Muhammed Speaks and he would come into the restaurant, Shabazz’ restaurant,
right off of a 116th and Lennox and we always knew he would be there so we
waited for him and he was such a spiritual person. I was never around Martin
Luther King but the two people that I happen to have the pleasure to be
around, to me, that had a Christ-like aura, Malcolm was one, John Coltrane was
the other.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO
Obviously, Coltrane a huge influence musically on you?
Gary Bartz 
For sure. Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Coltrane’s someone who played with them obviously. Miles Davis, you were in
his band around this time too.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
You mentioned Miles before. I want to ask you about the process by which Miles
would record you guys and then make records because I feel like it connects
with how people make music now.
Gary Bartz 
It’s funny, when you just said that. He almost worked like the Mizell Brothers
where he would come in with sketches. I think the whole time I work with Miles
for two years, I think we had one rehearsal. With Art Blakey, we never had a
rehearsal. I learned all of the music onstage, which is by ear, which is like
I say, that’s the best way. I teach school also but I see that young musicians
and they get up [and read the music]. If I go into a club and I see the band
and the band has music, I’m ready to leave. I really am because to me that
means one thing and one thing only: it means they don’t know the music. You
learn it. It’s like going to see a play or a movie and actors are reading from
the script.
[laughter]
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
But Miles would record you, guys, and then edit the pieces together for…
Gary Bartz 
No. He would give us sketches. He would have sketches like he would give me a
page of music and it had so many different ideas and he said, “This, we’re
going to do this.” It might be a little four bar thing so I just work on that.
See, I never went into studio with Miles. He felt that particular band was an
organic band. He didn’t think that was so much as a studio band so he recorded
it almost every performance, every concert we did was recorded so that’s why
you have like so many bootlegs out.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Did he record you guys and then released those recordings complete or did he
edit them together like on some of his other albums?
Gary Bartz 
He edited them. He and Teo Macero, as a matter of fact, we had to learn
because every night, one of the musicians and some of us would record. I
remember Keith Jarrett would record one night, Jack DeJohnette would record, I
would record and so travelling in the bus we’re listening to the night before
and so Miles, “Hey, what you’re listening to?” I would say, “This was last
night.” He said, “Let me listen to it.” We’d give him the tape to listen to it.
You’d never get that tape back.
[laughter]
We learned not to give him these tapes but what would happen, he would hear
something that he liked, it might be two bars, three bars, four bars, however
many and they would actually put that in the recordings that came out so they
were a melange of different [performances].
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Right, pieced together, which is more or less what happens now with a lot of
DJs and producers. You’ve obviously been sampled quite a bit. How do you like
that?
Gary Bartz 
I love it because I own my own publishing.
[laughter / applause]
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
How about the art form of it as well? Do you respect it apart from being able
to get a check?
Gary Bartz 
Yeah, I do. I think it’s a very viable art form.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I want to play something real quick, just a piece of something which you have
not heard and this is basically what a lot of DJs and producers do nowadays is
they’ll get the stems, look at the individual parts of, say, recordings from
the Fantasy catalogue or Milestone.
Gary Bartz 
Which I couldn’t get in those days, I would try to get them and…
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
You could probably get them now actually because someone put you in touch with
the people on that one and people do their own remixes. They’re not how you
envisioned them but they’re how a different generation might have envisioned
them. Similar to sampling. I just want to play something for you and see what
your impression was and everybody here should probably know this track.
(music: Gary Bartz – “Gentle Smiles (Kon re-edit)” / applause]
Gary Bartz 
Where can I buy that?
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
That’s Gary Bartz’s “Gentle Smiles (Saxy)”, known as being sampled by A Tribe
Called Quest.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah, “Butter.”
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Yeah, for “Butter” and that was a remix re-edited by Kon of Kon &
Amir fame, who’s a
producer and DJ and does quite a number of these types of remixes but this is
not for commercial release. It’s just something he was working on, sort of an
unfinished version. I called him this morning and I said, “Would it be cool if
I play this for Gary Bartz to get his impression because I know he’s very
progressive in terms of his attitude of what DJs do and how music is edited?”
So what’s your impression when you hear this?
Gary Bartz 
I love it. I want it. [laughs]
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I feel as though because of your experience working with, say, the Miles Davis
band and the fact that you had a good experience as far as hip hop producers
sampling your material, you have an attitude that maybe some other musicians
may not have and you’re more open and friendly as far as you can recognize the
creativity in this.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah. Well, that’s why I don’t like the different genres because that keeps
you in a box and I’ve had that problem during my whole career because I’m not
in a box. Even though they want to keep me in this box and I’m always I’ll do
this. You play music that you want to play. I’ve had to fight record labels,
as I call them plantation labels. Well, this goes back to a panel I did a few
weeks ago on Nicholas Payton’s blog. I don’t know if anybody’s familiar with
his blog but he is totally against the “J” word also as most thinking
musicians are anyway. I categorize musicians in three types of musicians.
There are house musicians, there are field musicians, there are free
musicians. House musicians will do what the record label says, “I’ve got this
idea. Let’s do an Elvis Presley cover. We’re going to…” A house musician will
say, “Okay. Whatever you say, boss.” Field musician will say, “No. I won’t do
it. Plus, I’ve got my own publishing so I want to do the songs that so I can…”
That’s a whole other conversation but that goes back to that.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I want to keep things moving a little bit here. We do have time for questions,
I believe, at this point. If anybody has a question for Mr. Gary Bartz, wait
for the microphone please and you can ask. Anybody? Right over here.
Audience member 
You mentioned The East and my grandfather’s actually Jito
Weusi, and also in your song, you’re saying “uhuru sasa,” and
that’s a school that my mother… so could you elaborate on your relationship to
that because that kind of hit like personal note for me aside from music so if
you could elaborate on that? That’ll be awesome.
Gary Bartz 
That was very important. It still is important. Jito is your [grandfather]?
Wow. Great man, really is. I just saw him not too long ago but, yes, “uhuru
sasa” which means “freedom now” in Swahili. Actually, I had worked at 10
Claver Place. You’re from Brooklyn? 10 Claver Place had been used by wives…
they had an organization, I think it was called We… I forgot the name of their
organization but the wife like Freddie Hubbard’s wife, Cedar Walton, a lot of
guys that lived there and so they were used in the place before The East but
that was a place that this music was performed, unlike most a lot of the clubs
around the city were not hiring those particular groups. That was our venue,
that was our home. The East was a very, very important time and it was… You
got a lot of notoriety because they didn’t allow [white people] in. It was
only for black people, that only black people could come and so people would
come from other regions. To me, there’s no such thing as race. It’s humans but
during that time, I guess we needed to do that to make a point and that was a
very wonderful time. It still goes on. I did something with Pharoah Sanders
there about a year or so ago. It’s still going on, good, yeah. Tell Jito I
said, “What’s up”.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Who’s next? Hello.
Audience member: 
Hi. You talked about last night in your show about you were a field musician
and about your job is spread messages and you were on a major labor back in a
day. Can you elaborate on that a little bit, like what does that mean to you
and what was that about?
Gary Bartz 
Can you say that again?
Audience member 
You talked about how when you’re on a label, you were kind of a field hand.
Gary Bartz 
Field hands, they’re not in the house. They are out in the field. They may be
a part of the plantation system but if you look, the most successful
musicians, just across the board, we’re not talking genres, but it seems like
a lot of times, the most successful musicians are house musicians and so they
usually don’t own publishing and so it’s to the advantage of the record labels
to push those artists because the record label owns their publishing and so
the record label’s going to get more money if they break these artists. If
they break some artists that have their own publishing, they’re not making as
much money. They don’t mind if the record sells but they’re not going to help
the record sell as much as they would house. Once you’re free, you don’t have
to deal with them at all. You own everything. To me, that’s a big problem
because the great music that we created in the last century, musicians own
hardly any of it. It’s all owned by corporations which is where we get back to
the occupied Wall Street thing. I did a research one time because I was trying
to find out who owned… you know, 3rd Bass sampled me, I don’t know if you’re
familiar with 3rd Bass but I know a lot of you guys are. They sampled me and I
was having trouble getting the publishing and so I went down to Washington DC
to the Library of Congress and was researching who really owns this. I was
shocked because most movies, most recordings, most things are owned by the
banks. Not even the record labels. They don’t own it because they used these
things as collateral. They all put it and give it to the bank as collateral to
get money and The Wizard of Oz is owned by a bank. It’s amazing, you know,
so I don’t know whether that answers your question.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Who’s next?
Audience member 
I imagine that there was a lot of saxophone players around the era of your
time in New York, so how competitive was it? Because I imagine there were so
many people that were influenced by Charlie Parker and Coltrane, was it also
competitive for you as a saxophone player as opposed to other instruments?
Gary Bartz 
No, actually it was a community. Pharoah Saunders taught me how to circular breathe. We used to practice every day, come by my house so we’d go out to West
Side, the Riverside park and play all day. And we would have this contest, the
cars were going by the drive West Side highway and we would try to play a note
so loud that make the drivers [look around where the sound is coming from].
Nobody ever did because it’s too loud but that’s how we would open our sounds.
We were helpful, Trane, you know I used to go by Trane’s house but I was too
shy and in awe of him. I just used to listen, you know, but some guys would
play with him but he was always practicing whenever you would go by their
house. But no, it was communal thing. We taught each other, we learned from
each other.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
In the front here.
Audience member 
First, I just wanted to say I’m a pianist myself and your performances with
Miles Davis’s group are a constant source of inspiration, and not just in the
musical notes sense, but in the way the music was constructed and the
interaction between you onstage. Could you elaborate a little bit on what it
was like to perform with that band and whether you see as you phrased it the
organic music whether you see a connection or a place for that in today’s
musical world?
Gary Bartz 
Yeah, there’s always a place for that but Miles was such a thinker. I just did
a panel with Ron Carter when they released the Miles Davis band from ’97 with
Wayne, Herbie, Tony and Ron and so I was listening to that band. That was a
totally different band from any other band he ever had as all of his bands
were. That was the freest band I’ve ever heard. Because I was in New York when
Ornette Coleman came to New York and everybody, “Ornette Coleman. You got to
go down hear his guy, man.” And all the older guys like Roy Eldridge and
Coleman Hawkins, “What the hell is he doing?” Everybody would go down, Dizzy
Gillespie went down, they all sat in. They wanted to sit in with him just to
feel what it was like this new music. I remember at the time, Miles, he didn’t
like it. But when I listened to that particular band from, what was it, what
did I say? It was ’97, ’67, that’s from ’67. He took what Ornette [created],
he took it to another level because that particular band of Miles was the
freest band and the fact that they would play chord changes. They would play
the song and if something happened or somebody went somewhere else other than
where the chords were, everybody went with them. I asked Ron about that. “Is
that what do you…?” He said, “Yeah.” He said, “Someone would take the lead.
Sometime, Tony would take the lead and everybody would go with Tony.” Even in
the midst of the soloist’s idea as Ron played that line and somebody heard it
and Herbie heard it, everybody would go there. I’ve never heard a band like
that that could go in and out of the changes go free, go changes. What was
your question?
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
Was that what you guys did as well and you were the group that followed after
that like a couple of different bands, ’70-ish, right?
Gary Bartz 
Seventy, yeah, I’ve joined the band in ’70.
Audience member 
Was that the same kind of creative interplay for you guys?
Gary Bartz 
No, because by that time, they were not playing the changes, or we weren’t
playing changes like [that]. I just did a gig with Chick Corea in New York and
Jack DeJohnette and Wallace Roney, and who’s playing bass? Do you remember?
Oh, Eddie Gomez, yeah. How could I forget Eddie? We were playing some of the
songs from that particular band from ’67, like “Dolores” which they never even
played that live. “Pee Wee,” Miles did not even solo on that on the record.
Wayne was the only soloist so we’re playing songs like that and that’s some
hard music. I mean, wow. “Dolores,” the structure is eight bars, eight bars,
six bar bridge and then eight and eight. So funny, man, I said six but it was
hard enough to play the chords and then you got to count too, oh my God.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO
You had to be a pretty good musician, I guess, to be able to do that stuff.
Gary Bartz 
Yeah.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
I think at this point, we’re actually going to wrap as far as questions go.
Anything you want to say in conclusion?
Gary Bartz 
I would like to say that I’m proud of today’s musicians and I think that what
you guys are doing is what we were doing, and Charlie Parker, and people like
that were doing because it comes from the street. It’s a street music and
right now, you guys are very street and I love that. Don’t lose that because
teaching school I’d see musicians come in and the first time they played, they
were reading and so when I say, “Okay. Play this. Play a note.” Bam, they
can’t play it because they have no ears. My son heard me talking to somebody
and I was saying, “Oh yeah. The young musicians of today, they don’t have any
ears.” He pictured literally. “What do you mean they have no ears? What
happened to them?” I must say I commend you guys and the DJs and keep doing
what you’re doing.
JEFF “CHAIRMAN” MAO 
And you as well. Everybody, let’s say thanks to Mr. Gary Bartz.
Gary Bartz 
Thank you.
