Jah Shaka’s legendary dubs, spiritual message and chest-rattling soundsystem have come to symbolize a deeper meaning in sound. Coming from Jamaica to London in the late ’50s, Jah Shaka’s young life was embedded within the black British immigrant experience: families building their own soundsystems and throwing house parties as a way to escape the racism and poverty that met so many of them on arrival. Having toured the world to spread his message of love, tolerance and spirituality for over 40 years, the Shaka sound remains a truly special one. 
In his 2014 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, one of the original heroes of Rastafarian music culture reflected on coming to England, his first soundsystem experience, and more.
Benji B 
This makes me very happy to be able to say this. Please join me in welcoming
the legendary Jah Shaka. It’s a real buzz for me personally to be able to host
this lecture today because the man sitting beside me has had a massive
influence on me and so many people in the UK and around the world. For people
in the room that aren’t familiar with yourself or what you do, could you
introduce yourself please and describe what you do in soundsystems?
Jah Shaka 
This is Jah Shaka, spiritual soundsystem, playing spiritual music from in the
‘60s in England, where there was a lot of difficulty with people arriving from
the Caribbean. The music was the thing that kept people together because when
the people left Africa to go to Jamaica and the Caribbean, all they could
bring is their songs and their music. They weren’t able to bring things with
them on a slave ship. They were unable. All they had was songs and memories of
home. So over the years, the music has kept the people together. In the ‘50s
and ‘60s in London, there were house parties, parties in rooms, 50-60 people.
There were only what we call record players. It kept the people together and
let families know other families, which was very important at that time
because the people were segregated. 
When the black people arrived in England
in those days, the difficulty was even to get a room. To get somewhere to live
was very difficult. So you had to be very skilful. The nurses came from the
Caribbean and helped the UK system. The people working in the hospitals,
nurses and people like that and doctors, came from the Caribbean to help their
families left in Jamaica and left in the Caribbean. That was the reason for
people to come to the UK and other countries, to better themselves and to
make sure that the people left behind in the Caribbean – that’s the only kind
of insurance the families had in those countries, were the people and the
families that went abroad. Some people went to Canada. Some people went to
America and were able to have jobs. So over the period of time, the music is
the thing that all the people had because it was very difficult for them in
the early days.
Benji B 
Could you explain what the Windrush was?
Jah Shaka 
The Windrush was one of the first ships that came to England, with the
first arrivals from Jamaica and those, as I was just saying, people had to be
skilful because England wouldn’t allow you to come there to just sit around.
You had to have a skill or a gift, something to offer the country. So those
people, when they came to London, it was to help the system of London. That’s
why they were able to come there, because Jamaica did not receive independence
until 1962. Jamaica was ruled by the British until 1962, when they were able
to get their independence, to separate themselves. Therefore people could have
Jamaican passports. There was no Jamaican passport before 1962 or no Jamaican
money. There was no Jamaican dollars. The money was English money – pounds,
shillings and pence. In the early days, that was the currency for Jamaica and
for England. 
It was very difficult after the Windrush time and, because of the
Windrush, more people were able to come to London to send for their friends.
If their friend was living somewhere, they could write a letter to Jamaica
saying, “Come to England and get a job,” and be able to help the families and
able to maybe get a property, which was very, very difficult because in the
Windrush time, the black people going to London, on the doors of the houses
and the gates of the houses there were signs saying, “No blacks, no Irish,
and no dogs.” These were the signs on the houses. So black people had it very
difficult because you were rated like you were not a human being. Growing up,
our parents and people that directed our lives would tell us, you have to
work very hard to overcome such system, such a regime. You had to be very
skilful. The Windrush people worked hard so that others could come to England.
Benji B 
You were born in Jamaica, but which year did you arrive in London?
Jah Shaka 
We came into England in 1956.
Benji B 
You’re schoolboy age at that time.
Jah Shaka
Very young, yeah.
Benji B 
Yeah. What were your first experiences like at school?
Jah Shaka 
It was very difficult, as I’m explaining, for black people, because arriving in
England at that time [there were] very few black people. The schools might be one or two
other families or two other children, black. All the rest of the school is
white. If they say, “Go back to your country. We don’t want you here.” Very,
very difficult time. Very difficult. The music is what kept the people
together, and the good memories of the past where people used to enjoy
themselves without having money. Money was not the enjoyment. The enjoyment
was to meet other people. For other people to get together, it was a joy.
Benji B 
When was the first time that you were enchanted by a soundsystem, and when was
the first time you were allowed to touch one?
Jah Shaka 
I would speak, I think, before that. I don’t know about the schools in Japan but
the schools in England said, “Don’t bring toys to school. No toys to school.”
But I got a gift of a mouth organ. I had it in my pocket and I used to take it
out in the school, but it was forbidden [to have] toys. So the teacher said, “You
know that you’re not supposed to have this – but can you play?” I said, “Yes, I
can play.” “Stop the class. Everybody stop. He’s going to play.” So I had to
play. That was my first idea that you could entertain people because at the
end of me playing, the crowd clapped. 
So that will bring us to entertainment.
Very early, there was a soundsystem named Freddie Cloudburst in south-east
London which was very close to us. At that time, no children or young
person [was] allowed to touch equipment. No touch. Because of that and we
looking after [the] equipment, polish[ing], the owner of equipment say, “Play records.” So
people said I can play. But that crowd at that time were older people. We were
young and we are playing to people 50, 60 years old. So we had to know what
kind of record to play for older people, not young. Old. Going through that
training with Freddie Cloudburst, it served a purpose for us.
Benji B 
What kind of records did you have to play for them at that time?
Jah Shaka 
All kinds of… you got Nina Simone. You got Tamla Motown with Diana Ross. You
got the Temptations. You got groups like the Drifters and people like this in
the early days of England, because they didn’t start to make Jamaican music
yet at that time. So we were collecting music from America. And the people in
Jamaica were listening songs from America. Only one station in Jamaica,
Rediffusion, so the people were listening to music from America and getting
inspiration to do music in Jamaica. At that time, only one radio station to
listen to music. So people were glad that some people like Studio One and
other studios were able to provide equipment for singers and musicians
to come and play. 
Hence, you have a school in Jamaica, the name is Alpha Boys’
School in Jamaica, where a lot of legendary musicians, they grew up in the
Alpha Boys’ School. That school was run by a lady named Sister Ignatius,
it was a Catholic school. The Catholic people decided to let the
children get instruments to learn to play music. You have many great musicians
what came up through Alpha, like Tommy McCook, Augustus Pablo and many more
people that grew up in Alpha Boys’ School in Jamaica. Listening to American
music and English music inspired people to say, “My friend can make music.
He’s good singer.” Your friend will say, “Oh, you can sing. You’re good.” And
you try to go to studio to put your feelings from the heart. Many songs at
that time came from within a soul, within a heart, because it was very
important time for our people.
Benji B 
Can you talk to us about the concept of soundsystem, having a soundsystem,
and a little bit about the hierarchy within the soundsystem – starting off
as a box boy and then learning the equipment and making the equipment?
Jah Shaka 
As I said, we came through Freddie Cloudburst soundsystem. After that time,
we decided to have a soundsystem for ourself which, in that time, because of
the difficulty of black people coming to London or coming to England, we had
to have something to bring message to people. Therefore, many people at that time were in Black Power, which someone called
Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Angela Davis, and other great people were
sending messages for the people to be united around the world. Therefore, this
transpired to come to London where many people were feeling the pain of
suffering, not good jobs, not being able to make money, very difficult. 
These
messages from these great leaders like Malcolm X or Martin Luther King and
such forth gave the people hope. Hope was very important because nothing else
was there. You had to only hope for the future and pray for the people, for the
future. A very difficult time for our people. Because of this, in those days,
because of Black Power, the soundsystem was formed [as] a vehicle for the
message. To bring message of peace. To bring people together. You have great
leaders, national heroes in Jamaica. I’m sure you have heard of Marcus Garvey,
a great leader in Jamaica, [he] would also bring messages to the people. These
people are very important. That’s how they become national heroes, because [of] what
they stood for, what they believed in, and what they lived by. 
Therefore,
these things have been handed down that some people will carry on the work. Like for instance, if I come next year, this person might be Minister of
Trade. This person might be manager of company, because when you practise
something, eventually it will reach somewhere. You set high targets that if
you miss, you are still somewhere. You set high targets and if you don’t hit
center, you’re still somewhere. This is important. Many messages, like from
Martin Luther King and these people, were sown amongst our people for some
other person to take the message onto further level. The music helped to do that.
In Poland, the Freedom Party, their messages were spread by reggae. In Poland,
the Freedom Party, [there were] messages to help freedom fighters, reggae music. When Bob Marley went to Zimbabwe for independence, [it was] reggae music. It’s very important messages,
and also the music helped vocabulary, words. People learned to speak English
by listening to music. They learned words. I’ve been in Ghana before. Someone
I meet can sing “One Love” by Bob Marley, but can’t speak English. They can
sing that song but can’t speak English. When the song is finished, they can’t
speak. They learned to speak English around the world through the music. 
So it
is important not just to dance, but to listen to message. Message is very
important to spread amongst the people. I say again, we plant the seeds that
it will grow, because you have professors in England and around the world
studying about music, what it does for people. Professors in university in
England study about music, where it came from. During the studies of the
professors that study about music, they want to find out origin of music. When
they check all the records to find out, they go back to Africa with the drum.
The drum. The Indians used to send smoke signal for message. Someone on a
mountain could see message. In Africa, drum is used to send message. The drum
speaks. When the professors check everything, they find out the music and the
beat from Africa very important. The professors have said this, not just I,
studies about culture, about where people come from. Give thanks.
Benji B 
You’re considered very much the father of soundsystems in the UK, certainly
dub reggae soundsystems, and have gone onto influence so many more. What was
the moment where you first started your own sound and,
furthermore, how did you find your own musical direction? Because you’ve
stayed very firmly true to the dub reggae sound, all the way through the ‘70s,
‘80s, ‘90s, to the present day. What was the moment that made you realize that
that was the message that you wanted to spread?
Jah Shaka 
From early childhood, I played as a musician. We play instruments. From school
we are playing the drums. We are playing guitar. We are playing keyboards.
Then, you have a part when our parents were in churches in England. Many
churches had bands, with choir singing, band playing in the churches. In fact,
one of the churches in south-east London was formed in my mother’s house. So
we had a early insight of the church. We became very thoughtful about what God
wants us to do. What difference can we make in the world today? 
We decided at
that time, through the movement of the Fasimbas [black political organization] in London, that this
would be a way to spread a message to enlighten, to give people more
knowledge, because we still see that they say people have five senses. Five
senses, they have said. But we think that there is two more senses, which will
make seven. Telepathy, where you spread message from mind, and you
have intuition. Intuition is you can see far away. Intuition and telepathy
will develop your mind. Like for instance, some of the people here would have
heard about Beethoven or Mozart or Bach or Tchaikovsky. These are early
musicians who write music, written music. Beethoven, they write music.
But sometime in Jamaica and in England, people don’t write. They play from
memory, from memory. When a band is on the stage to play, you hear the drummer
say, “One, two, one, two, three.” No sheet, no read, no read, no sheet.
Memory training very important. Practice, preparation, very important things.
Benji B 
Do you want to play us a record, any record?
Jah Shaka 
Give thanks. Rastafari. I’ll find something to play for you. Just a minute.
This is one of our productions. Because Shaka made quite a few albums and 7”s
and disco. A lot of CDs we made over the years concerning what we are speaking
about. We have made music to give that message. Rastafari. 
(music: Jah Shaka – “Promise Dub”)
Jah music. This is dub. Concentrate on the bass mostly. The Bible said, “Praise Jah on the drum
and the bass and the sound of high flying cymbals.” This is a dub music. New
Testament of Dub, on Shaka label. We are playing from this album, New
Testament of Dub. I give thanks and praise to Jah.
(Sings) Jah is good and his mercy is enjoyed forever. Jah is good and his mercy is
enjoyed forever. Give thanks and praise unto Jah. I say fi give thanks and
praise unto Jah. I say the Jah, Jah maker want Jah Jah maker Jah. Jah Jah
maker, Jah Jah maker Jah. Let Jah Jah be your guiding star. I said, Jah Jah be
your guiding star. I said that whether you come from near or far or whether
you come by bus or car. Let Jah Jah be your guiding star. Let Jah Jah be
your guiding star. Love Jah and live I say because if you will die. Love Jah
and live you better love Selassie-I. Jah is the light of the world. Jah is the
light of the world. Jah is the bright and morning star. Jah is the bright and
morning star. Jah is the lily of the valley, the bright and morning star. Jah
is the lily of the valley, the bright and morning star. Jah, Jah, Jah, Jah
Rastafari. Jah, Jah, Jah, Jah Rastafari. Jah, Jah, Jah, Jah Rastafari. Jah,
Jah, Jah, Jah Rastafari. Jah, Jah live ’pon earth in the united sky. Jah, Jah
live ’pon earth you better love Selassie-I. Jah is my guiding star. Jah is my
guiding star. Jah is my guiding star. 
Inspiration from Jah. Rastafari to the people of Japan. Rastafari. (Applause) Yeah. Rastafari. Jah! Selassie-I. Always give thanks to Selassie-I. Jah!
Benji B 
Is that New Testaments of Dub, right? Yeah. I want to
show a video of you at The Rocket in the UK if that’s okay with you. I think
this is late ‘70s. Have we got video? Yeah, all right. Let me see if I can get
this technology right. The quality is really bad but you get the vibe.
(video: Jah Shaka at The Rocket, London)
What’s that? You want to play a message? (To audience) He just told me that’s Dennis
Brown’s voice saying “Shaka.” I always wondered.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, Virgin, Dennis Brown. 
(music: Roger Robin – “Journey On”)
This song by Roger Robin, I See Jah album. Jah Shaka production. “I See
Jah,” Roger Robin. Young singer in London. Thank you.
Benji B
The video that we just watched, what year was that do you reckon?
Jah Shaka 
It’s about ‘71.
Benji B 
That’s at The Rocket on Holloway Road?
Jah Shaka 
I believe, yes.
Benji B 
I mean, I didn’t get to come to The Rocket until the ‘90s, but amazingly I came to
see you in the same venue over 20 years later, and the same thing fascinates me
as what fascinated me in that video. The first thing that happens is you have
to get over the physical impact of going into the space and feeling the music,
which is a physical experience. Then once you’ve acclimatized to that, I was
just fascinated by the equipment. So right now, I want to get technical and
for you to start talking to us about the equipment that you built to
put together that legendary soundsystem.
Jah Shaka 
In the early days, we had ideas of earlier sounds, coming from Jamaican
soundsystems, coming from Jamaica to England, and records coming. We had
ideas and, because of the topics of freedom of the people, we made certain
design. So in the early days, if you had some equipment, it wouldn’t be the
same as this person equipment or that person equipment, because you had your
preference to how you want it to sound. You had some expert builders of
amplifiers because it wasn’t bought in shops. These were built by friends or
companions, or close people put you in touch with somebody that could build an
amplifier. After the amplifier was built, you had to explain to
the builder or engineer what you want to sound like. Do you want your bass
here? Do you want your bass there? Do you want your treble here or here or do
you want your mid-range here? You had to explain your preference. That made
the early days of soundsystems… each soundsystem was unique. 
Nowadays, the
soundsystems, some amplifiers are bought in shops and it is not custom. So
it’s difficult for them to change the equipment. But in the early days,
engineers were available, great engineers, to make things that you could tell
them, “I want this. I want this. I want it to sound like this.” As I explained
before, practising and testing over the years and collecting information and
listening to sounds, different sounds, and being a musician. I would
explain now to many people that are in Logic and [their] computer making music, it’s
very important to know about true sound. When I say true sound, I mean, a drum
– what is the real sound of a drum? You have to have the idea of what is a
real drum. Although you’re using a computer, you want it to sound real.
Therefore, some people will sample real instruments into their computer, real
bass drum, real hi-hat, real guitar sample, so when you play your computer,
you will get a more true sound. Because the computer is made with certain
sounds in it, but to get true sound, you have to adjust. You have to adjust it
to get a real sound. 
There was an interview with Family Man, who is
the bass man for The Wailers, which is a friend of mine also. It’s on the
internet, they ask him, “What information would you give to people coming into
music now to tell the youth? What would you tell them?” Family Man, bass man
from The Wailers, said, “Tell them to study music from the ‘50s and ‘60s and
study analog before digital. Study analog.” Family Man says study analog to
know about sound, to study about true sound, analog sound. Then when you go
onto digital, you have more of an idea. You have more of an idea how to tune
your computer for it to sound more real, because not everybody can afford to go
to a studio like Red Bull studio. It would cost a lot of money in England for
a musician to book this studio. So many people try to make music on their
laptop or on their computers. They try to make music about this. So it’s
important to learn about analog as well as learning about computer. And when
you link the two of them, good sound.
Benji B 
Talking of making the most of what you have, can you talk to us about the
modifications that you used to make to your amplifiers? What kind of things
would you do to make the most of the equipment you had?
Jah Shaka 
In the early days, the equipment was very small. We depended more on
frequency, not power – frequencies, frequency. We depended more on frequency
than the power because the power will only amplify your frequency.
Therefore we try to get the frequency of the bass and these things working
properly. Again, I speak about the professor at Cambridge University,
study about music. He go to many parties, many festival with meter to check
decibel, decibel meter, to study about sound. The professor’s conclusion was
that bass help the human body bowels, the bowels of the human body. Bass can
help the bowels of the body. Not Shaka say, professor say. (Laughter) Shaka only repeat.
Not Shaka say, professor. Bass is good for your system, your digestive system.
Also you have people in car crash, in hospital, can’t speak, coma. They call it
a coma. They bring iPod, cassette, put music in their ears in hospital bed.
They recover, regain senses. Music also is a therapy for people, the human
body. There’s elements of music which is like nature for the people. These
elements are very important as well, to get these elements into your music
when you are making your music, that other people can feel, not just hear.
Feel, hear, heart, and feel the beat and then acknowledge what the music is
about, what the music does for you. Those things are very important to us.
Benji B 
Can you expand a bit on the difference between volume and frequency, because I
feel like that’s an important part of the science of what you do, the
difference between having loud bass and the right frequency of bass?
Jah Shaka 
It’s very difficult to explain. Some bass is very loud, so people (clutching his ear), too loud. Some bass is hertz. Hertz means like rumbling but
you don’t hear. It’s very low frequency. Hertz is very, very low frequency. So
we try to play the low frequency, which some people think is volume but it’s
not volume, it’s a frequency. It would be hard to explain unless you have some
equipment where we could show the people what we are talking about. Frequency
is whether it’s in mid-range or whether it’s a treble, the frequency is
different. For instance then, this cartridge is a magnetic. If you were
playing a record now and you take out this cartridge and put a ceramic needle,
it’s a different frequency. Still play the record but completely different
frequency. So it might be you’d have to adjust this different when you change
this needle. It’s adjustment sometimes and what you need to get. People need
to study frequency.
Benji B 
With that in mind, do you find it difficult when you travel to play on sound
systems that aren’t your own soundsystem?
Jah Shaka 
Sometimes, but we try our best to do what we have. Sometimes. But we give
thanks because some people are only learning. Yeah, so after we leave, they
learn a bit more. Next time it’s a bit better. Next time a bit better. We
explain and advise.
Benji B 
Obviously you’re known very well as a DJ, but what was the moment that made you
decide to start creating music as a musician yourself?
Jah Shaka 
In the ‘80s there was a time when oil was not so prevalent like now. Oil. In
Jamaica, there was a period in the ‘80s and ‘70s where no pressing in Jamaica,
vinyl was very scarce. People had to regenerate old stuff to make stuff. There
was a time – in fact Bunny Wailer made a record, “Arab Oil
Weapon,” because of those times. There was no oil for other people. So we
started to put trumpets, saxophone onto old music to be something different at
that time, to do different things. Because for one year, no records from
Jamaica. You had to make your own records.
Benji B 
That’s the reason you started making your own music, to have something to
play?
Jah Shaka 
Different than other sounds.
Benji B 
Yeah.
Jah Shaka 
Because soundsystem at that time was very competitive.
Benji B 
Tell me about that competition. Tell me about the legendary Shaka and 
Coxsone [Dodd]
clashes.
Jah Shaka 
You have all these soundsystems and on the night, everybody want to come out
on top of a certain gig. Everybody wants to be on top. We didn’t really enter
as clashes really, but the people, when they want to take you on you had to
defend yourself. All those soundsystem know that Shaka comes with a message.
All of those soundsystems, they know that. Shaka is a message of Rastafari, a
message of Jah, a message of goodwill, righteousness, trustworthy, dignity,
integrity. They know what we stand for. Shaka sound is built on a principle,
not just equipment, principle. They know about Shaka principle. So some people
don’t try to clash because we have our principle and we have many supporters over the years, because of the principles what we stand by, how we
live.
Benji B 
It’s really important to talk about that principle because it relates directly
  to you sticking to your guns with dub music through the ‘80s. Is it fair to
say that in the middle of the ‘80s, dub wasn’t as popular when dancehall
emerged and “Sleng Teng” emerged and “slackness” started to emerge in records?
It’s important for you to explain that turning point in the music’s history
and the music that was coming out of Jamaica, and that decision that you made
to stay true to your principles.
Jah Shaka 
About ‘83, ‘84, I believe [dancehall DJ] Yellowman came to London to do a show. I believe it
was in Edmonton, a place called Pickett’s Lock. It was a very big show. People
were thinking, “Bob Marley is not here – who will lead reggae?” People had this
thinking in mind. When Yellowman came to England and [there] was a roadblock, police
diverting traffic, a lot of excitement, they said, “Well, Yellowman is great.”
Therefore, in Jamaica now, more DJs rise up. When you’re at Sunsplash in
Jamaica and these big shows, DJ nights were bigger than singer nights because
of the excitement and the thing around it. During that [1980s] period of time, we
didn’t play those records of that era because it was different than… because
it’s good to have a topic, that we don’t have to divert from the topic. I’d
like you to find something.
Benji B 
Yeah, yeah. Sure.
(video: Unknown)
(Speech from video) People have been left behind in their school work and Whitley and
this fine organization is making a difference. This has been an awesome night,
hasn’t it? How many of you like Negro spirituals? An old black lady down south
showed me something about the Negro spirituals and I want to share it with
you. The black folk down south had more sense by accident than some of us have
on purpose. You know what I mean? You didn’t hear what I said. I heard an old
black lady say, “Son, if the mountain was smooth, you couldn’t climb it.“
Think about that for a minute. She said to me, “Did you know all, just about
all Negro spirituals are written on the black notes of the piano?“ This is
absolutely true. You can go home tonight and play almost any Negro spiritual.
Just play the black notes on the piano. You look skeptical. You can’t see it
out there but I want you to watch. Watch. There are five black notes on the
piano and those same five black notes just keep recurring. You can go home
tonight and play almost any Negro spiritual. Just play the black notes. Watch. 
(Plays “Every Time I Feel The Spirit”)
Jah Shaka
Just an insight
about music. This man is in America and you can see the mixed multitude of
people that are interested in the music. This is America. This man is living
in America. It’s very important to know about the keys, the keys on a keyboard
and the notes that you use. Shaka really uses minor notes. You have major
notes and you have sharps. You have other notes that you can use, diminished
notes, but there’s minor notes, which we regard as angelic notes, what is used
in music. Minor. 
So, like the brothers, their practice is very important to come
up with new ideas. There’s seven notes in music, only seven. It’s almost a
very high science how many millions and millions and millions and billions of
music is made from just these seven notes. Just seven notes in music but
billions of songs, different counteractions, different putting together, is
completely different. When you are practising, you will find a new way of
introducing these seven notes because people have got the skill and
inspiration to be able to do this. It’s very important as a subject to keep
practising, keep playing, because now they’re using music to advertise on TV,
music advertise selling washing machine, selling soap powder, selling chair.
Music is selling. To get to the people, they use music. Some people here, I
don’t know if the people at the Academy can write music because to write music
is another angle within the music, to be able to write the notes on paper. To
be able to write the notes on paper, if you make an anthem or a theme song,
you are able to register with companies that can use your music in a film or
an advert but they would need it written. To write music is another study that
probably the Academy can let the people know.
Benji B 
We have a pretty amazing studio on the ground floor, which you’ve seen.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, I’ve seen it. Very good.
Benji B 
I’m sure I speak on behalf of everyone in the room that it would be amazing if
you would, if you have time to come and show us your recording techniques.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, we’ll have to do something.
Benji B 
And maybe the basic principles of versioning and of dub as well and your way
of doing that.
Jah Shaka 
We can work on it. No problem.
Benji B 
Does that sound all right? Yeah? Cool. If we have time. I don’t know.
Wulf’s the boss but
if we have time we’ll do it after this session. Otherwise...
Jah Shaka 
We’ll do what we can.
Benji B 
We’ll do what we can. Otherwise, we’ll do some more tomorrow. Talking of film,
do you mind if I play a clip from Babylon?
Jah Shaka 
You can play.
Benji B 
Because that was the first time that your system appeared on camera right?
Officially. Can you just give us some context on what was Babylon? It was a
1981 film.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, 1981.
Benji B 
What was it about?
Jah Shaka 
Really the stories, our story really, but the people that lived nearby us saw
things that we had done and was able to, [because] they live in the same area, to put
something like this together. The whole story is really Shaka’s story.
Benji B 
The whole story is?
Jah Shaka 
Is really Shaka’s story, really.
Benji B 
We’ll just play a bit of this.
(video: clip from Babylon)
You’re going to have to call only two songs tonight. That’s it. Me? Yes, man
you. You do it. Good night.
Jah Shaka 
Give thanks. That was Brinsley, the other co-star, from 
Aswad, and myself in the
film Babylon from ‘81. Thank you.
Benji B 
One of main reasons I wanted to play that clip, apart from it being of course
a feature film, is to play those sounds, just to play those sounds, because
for the people in the room that haven’t had the pleasure of hearing Shaka, and
you will on Saturday, a crucial part of the experience obviously is the mad
echo, obviously is the delay, obviously is the reverb, and obviously is the
mic. But a huge part of it is a siren that has almost become officially known
as the Shaka siren. I thought maybe you could just explain how that came
about, how that became such a significant signature of yours working with the
siren and the delay, and now there’s even an iPad app that has the word Shaka
on the siren.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, Apple has used our name on a product somehow.
Benji B 
They didn’t ask, right?
Jah Shaka 
No, they didn’t ask. They seem to have sampled. No matter how many sirens have
been made, ours is one of the unique sounds. Apple used that one in their program,
on their apps. Other soundsystem over the years, many soundsystems, they
have a siren like what they saw in the film. Because before this film, many
people didn’t know about Shaka before this film. Although I had not met some
people, they were able to see from this film equipment what we use. Over the
years, it has been inspiring to know that other people have took note of what
we were doing over the years and really carrying it on. I’ve also a record
here from what my son produced because my son has his own studio. One of my
sons, they call him Young Warrior. You can find him on the internet. That’s
one of my sons, I have a record here of his production. Should I play?
Benji B 
Sure, but just finish that thought about the famous Shaka siren. When did you
make your first siren box?
Jah Shaka 
When we started. That was about ‘69.
Benji B 
Are you feeding it into a delay and then another delay?
Jah Shaka 
No, no, just straight into one delay. Normally we use a delay called H&H but
it’s very difficult to get it because it runs on a tape loop, not digital.
It’s an analog set up so it’s very difficult to get now. It’s like antique, an
H&H echo chamber. Maybe you can see it on the internet or things like that.
That’s what we were using in that film.
Benji B 
What else is in the stack? Tell us what’s in the Shaka stack.
Jah Shaka 
You got the general pre-amp is the basic pre-amp, but you also have bass
frequencies which you can adapt. Some people call it a parametric. We’ve got
a parametric on the bass and a parametric on the top. It’s just simple. It’s
not so much things but it’s how you use it.
Benji B 
Tell me about the science of how you set up the room? How do you tune a room?
When you go on soundcheck and you put the Shaka soundsystem...
Jah Shaka 
Like this place now, if you put some boxes there in that corner, there’s an
acoustic according to the room. If your speaker was there, you would play it
louder than putting it here because the shape of the room and the roof
can... Even sometime, if you turn the speaker to the wall, you get more bass
by rebound. Over years of studying, when you go into a place like this, you
assess where is the best place to put speaker that the people, everyone can
hear. We don’t play, like some soundsystem play, with a stack or two stack.
We want surround sound, so it surround. Everybody can hear everything.
Benji B 
Normally you have four?
Jah Shaka 
Four. It’s normally four stacks.
Benji B 
So wherever you’re standing...
Jah Shaka 
Wherever you’re standing, you get the same sound. If you are playing there now
with your amplifier and all your boxes are here, you will turn up more to hear
it. That’s not good to us. We need monitor, to monitor the sound from there to
here, to have an idea that all of them now will sound equal. That’s part of
balance.
Benji B 
When I was a kid, I went to some festivals and stuff where there used to be
guys in lab coats and it would say, “Sound provided by Jah Shaka.” Do you
still rent sound or create sound for other people as well or is it just
exclusively yourself now?
Jah Shaka 
You know that Young Warrior has his own soundsystem. I think you can show him
on the... He’s doing the new generation of dub and he played with Red Bull
twice in England, for Red Bull Culture Clash. So there’s things
happening. You can show a clip of him I think. I can play his record.
Benji B 
All right. Yeah. Just before you do that, tell us about the selector tradition of always having one
turntable at eye level?
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, well, I always talk about this turntable in this way because that
turntable, Garrard, is built during the war time. Those turntable exist
between 1945 and 1950.
Benji B 
You still use it?
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, we still.
Benji B 
You’re still using that?
Jah Shaka 
We’re still using Garrard, yeah. It’s very old. It’s like antique now. It
costs a lot of money on the internet to get a turntable like that because it’s
completely different. The arm is completely different from these. You don’t
get that feedback to the arm because those turntables were built to play 78
records. You got these turntables on there (points to table), for 33
and 45, but the old Garrard is built for 78 records. Therefore, you got like
Nina Simone, “My Baby Don’t Cares for Me,” and all those things on that, [Jesse Belvin’s] “Good
Night My Love (Pleasant Dreams),” was originally on 78 records. The early
sounds in England used to have to have Garrard, else they couldn’t play them.
There were no records yet from Jamaica. But we found out about when you link
it up with equipment, it gives it less feedback than any turntable in the
world.
Benji B 
Oh, really?
Jah Shaka 
Yes, less feedback. You can put it on the floor and play it.
Benji B 
So you don’t need to isolate it from the...
Jah Shaka 
Not so much, no, like other turntables. That’s the reason why we still use it.
Benji B 
And the syndrum?
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, that’s very important because other people have taken it like the siren
but we actually play it like you saw in Babylon film. That was another
iconic thing that people saw with us. So we try to develop new things and
people see. We test lots of things what we haven’t even used yet, but we test
things to know, does it sound good? Test. Test. Test. Lots of different things
we test to get right sound.
Benji B 
With the vintage and that more archive, old-school equipment, are you
still using that because it’s what you know, or are you only using it because
you haven’t heard anything that sounds as good?
Jah Shaka 
If we make new amplifiers now, it has to be on a par with the old ones
because the pre-amp is built to deliver a certain punch. We can use valve
amplifiers, build a transistor amplifier to be able to sound like it, because
you got an idea what type of sound you want to get. Therefore we can put
things in the amplifier on the driving stage to give it a definite sound. So
when you turn up, that is the sound you will get. Don’t change. There’s a set
frequency which, once we’ve got it, we leave. We don’t keep turning, turning.
We leave that frequency there and the treble frequency and mid-range frequency
the same. 
Actually, you can play any record like that. Sometime you might need
a little more treble or a little more bass, according to the record. Some
records are made on reissued vinyl. Sometimes the quality is not excellent so
you have to have a good pre-amp. In the early days, people didn’t play Studio
One records unless you had a good sound. Because the sound on it,
the vinyl was crackling on the record (makes hissing sound). To get that out, the Garrard needle
used on the Garrard, [there] was already equalization in the needle because of playing
78 record, to get that at that speed. The Garrard turntable was the best to
play Studio One on, these early pressings, which were not of high quality.
Benji B 
When you’re isolating, when you’re actually playing and you’re isolating the
bass, is that an isolator that you’ve made yourself?
Jah Shaka 
No. That’s a crossover that’s built in the pre-amp first. We build that into
the system.
Benji B 
Right, right, right.
Jah Shaka 
When other people went to the builder, they said, “Oh, we want a pre-amp like
Shaka’s.” Yeah.
Benji B 
Yeah.
(music: Young Warrior presents Sista Beloved – “Freedom of the Land”)
This is your son.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, this is produced by my son. The vocal is Sista Beloved. Not just
men sing music. Woman sing as well. “Freedom of the land. Every
nation wants freedom.” Every nation wants freedom and it’s necessary that every
nation has freedom. And everybody wants the freedom because it’s been taken
away from them. The freedom to love each other, freedom of speech, movement
and religion is a human right. We talk about freedom of the land because human
rights are there that everybody wants freedom, no matter what nation you
belong to. When you’re free, you’re happy. You’re joyous. And it’s very
important you can develop and come up with ideas to progress yourself.
(Turns up music) Young Warrior production. OK, Jah too darn right. Ah, Jah Jah too darn
right. Too darn right Jah Jah righteousness. Too darn right Jah Jah
righteousness. Freedom. Freedom of Jah land, you know. We have to get freedom
some day, freedom with what we want today. Creation. Jah be for creation. Tell
it to the nations. Tell it to the nations. Jah be for creation. Equal rights
and justice stands for all. Equal rights and justice. All nations want equal
rights. Fighting for equal rights and justice for one and all. All nation want
freedom. All nations want their freedom. All nations want freedom. Young
Warrior productions. Rastafari. (Applause)
Notice the reference on the bass. The notes
you are hearing are minor chords, minor chords. Some people who read about
music could tell you now what chord this is in. Is it A minor? Is it D? Is it
E? Is it F? Is it G? When you study music, you could tell now what key this
music is in. There’s much more studies to know about keys, to just listen and
know. Is it F? Is it D? Is it E? Is it a minor? Is it a major? Is it a flat?
Is it a diminished note? There’s many notes so you have to study about it.
Rastafari.
Benji B 
Can I play something from the Commandments of Dub album? Early, early Shaka.
This is some of your first releases, right? Some of the sounds on this
LP must have been the most sampled in UK music sound effects, definitely.
(music: Jah Shaka – “Verse 1”)
You’re playing bass.
Jah Shaka 
This is from Commandments of Dub Chapter One. Rastafari. From 1980. 1980 this
one, Shaka label, Commandments of Dub. Shaka playing bass on this one. Shaka
on bass, yeah. Some of the sound effects from the past.
Benji B 
You talked to us about the techniques in the dance, but do you want to talk us
a little bit of studio technique when you’re in the studio? What’s your
approach in the studio when you’re producing?
Jah Shaka 
We go to the studio with a clear mind and leave room for Jah to inspire. You
go to the studio [with a] clear canvas and leave room for inspiration and then we come
up with ideas which is new because it’s not good to go into the studio all the
time to copy somebody’s music what has been done already. It’s good to create
your own music, with your own blend and your own notes, your own changes, your
own bridges. So we like to do that, to create, create new music from the seven
notes.
Benji B 
It’s worth mentioning that your label has released music from the likes of
Johnny Clarke. Who else? Max Romeo.
Jah Shaka 
Horace Andy, Max Romeo.
Benji B 
Bim Sherman.
Jah Shaka 
Twinkle Brothers, Bim Sherman. Yeah it’s list of... and amongst Vivian Jones,
English artists, many of them, Sister Rasheda. Now my son has released four
new albums this year. We still work with the community and try to spot
talent where it’s possible. If we spot a talent and it’s good, we let that
person know and give them more confidence, even if they’re not working with
us. To go on to be a success, we try to advise them.
Benji B 
With that in mind, are there any selectors or sounds, young sounds, that you
think are...?
Jah Shaka 
We have a new generation of sounds, which play with my son and they play
in England, like Iration [Steppas], and you have Earthquake, another soundsystem which
is in that kind of genre, that kind of era. But a lot of the old soundsystems
doesn’t really exist again. A lot of the old ones from the ‘60s. You had Duke Reid. You had Coxsone. You have Count Shelley. You have Sir Fanso. You have
Fatman. You have Quaker City from Birmingham. A lot of good sounds which help
their community at that time. As I was saying, the music was important to keep
people together. So you had a lot of soundsystem were played for their
people. If they were playing at the dance with you, they could have their
friends and your friends would meet and sometime friendly. 
It depends between
sound men because the sound people have control. If they don’t make noise on
the microphone to each other, the people will be all right, if they are not
against each other. If we should go in a dance and I say one love to the next
sound and the sound said one love back, it would be a peaceful affair and
you’re able to put over a message clearly because no preacher has ever been
preaching in the church to give a sermon and be interrupted. So sometime if
you know a lot of sound is making noise, we don’t really play with sound
system, because we want the message to be very clear, so you don’t want too
much diversion. Because, you know, some of the soundsystem are playing
different type of music. Because we have got our topic from a long time, we
continue that role. Jah has inspired us and he gave us this gift and we are
honored to be able to play a role in the development of reggae and the
development of a generation of people around the world. We are honored to be
able.
Benji B 
You mentioned community. A lot of your dances would happen in community
centers where often alcohol was not served, which means there’s not so much
restriction on the license which means that often when you leave, the buses
are running again and the tubes are running again and it’s the next day.
Jah Shaka 
All night, yeah.
Benji B 
All night. How long, as a DJ, how long as a selector would you play for, on
average, on a Jah Shaka dance?
Jah Shaka 
Sometimes eight, nine hours, sometimes. Sometimes 12. It depends. Sometimes
you’re at festivals, big affairs where the people want us to play. The
promoter might try to say, “Can you finish?” But the people say, “No, no, no.
We want more. We want more.” We play for the people.
Benji B 
I remember it was always a known thing that you had to wait until about three o’clock, that
was the time where Shaka would open the dubplate box. The dubplate box stays
closed until about 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah, because you’re always had - and people talk about this, because we
promote - most of the labels that come out in the world that makes music which
is our topic, about God, about his majesty, about truth and rights. We promote
all these labels around the world. We do promotion for labels, not just Shaka
music. We promote all these other labels. It’s a big list of labels that make
roots music what fit our topic. The things I’m saying, there is music that is
made. So sometime I look at it to say, the people have helped my subject by
making these music. I can get them and put them into my sermon, my message
what I’m putting over. So that’s a part of it, that the young youths get
promotion. 
Because when we started soundsystem, you must know that there was
no radio station. Reggae was not being promoted on the radio like
now. At that time, the only promotion you had was soundsystem and parties.
That was the only way people would know the records from Jamaica. We’ve had
many good friends over the years. Some are not with us now, like Gregory
Isaacs, a good friend of mine. We were in Jamaica together. We were in London
together. There is John Holt, a good friend of mine that maybe I can find a
picture on the laptop to show you, John Holt and myself this year, Garance
Festival. A lot of people have played a big part in reggae. Sugar Minott,
people like this have played a big part. 
So we hope that the companies that
sell reggae sometime will look back and look at these artists and able to help
their families. Because they’ve made big impact on record company, whether
Island Records, CBS, EMI, all these labels, Virgin, a big impact was made by
these artists in the early days to build these companies to what they are. So
we pray that at some time, the companies will able to put something back like
Red Bull is doing now because I’ve asked you about it. You said you’re leaving
the studio here for the students in the Academy, which is very good that you
have left something for them to continue and practice. We give thanks that Red
Bull was able to set up this Academy in Japan. Thank you. (Applause)
Benji B 
We’re going to open up for some questions from the room but, before we do
that, Shaka wanted to play a recording recently made in Edinburgh to give you
a little flavor of the... Not recent? We just play any part, right? Yeah. You
want me to start it from the beginning?
(music: Excerpt from Jah Shaka Soundsystem featuring Norman Grant)
Jah Shaka 
This is a live dance in a place named Scotland in Great Britain. Edinburgh.
The singer is Twinkle Brothers’ Norman Grant. The soundsystem we were playing
on that night is Messenger from Edinburgh. The club is the Bongo Club in
Scotland. Edinburgh.
Benji B 
One thing we have to mention is, as we were just talking about, the famous
Shaka last tune. And it’s always famous because you always draw some dubplate
that everyone has been waiting for about seven hours to hear. It’s also famous
because it’s pretty much the only time that you can see anyone, because it’s
been so dark up until that point and then the lights come on. There’s a few on
YouTube and I can’t find the right one but we’ll just play a random one from
the Dome in London to give you an idea of what it looks like at 7:00 in the
morning. We’ve got two things going on there. Sorry. My bad.
(video: Excerpt from Jah Shaka soundsystem at The Dome, London)
I feel bad now. I don’t know how many of these people know they’re being
filmed. We’ve all been there. There’s a lot of clips where you can actually
see Shaka at the controls which are better than this one. I’ll leave you to
find those in your own time. But the Shaka last tune is always a special
moment. Where are you playing on Saturday? What’s the venue on Saturday?
Jah Shaka 
Unit.
Benji B 
Perfect. All right. We’ll make sure we’re all going to be at Unit on Saturday,
hopefully until the last tune for sure. Have we got any questions, because time
is running out and I want to make sure that you get a chance to ask questions
to Mighty Shaka? Oh, there you go.
Audience Member 
This is quite a humbling experience. I’m a
big fan of your work and legacy and also quite a fan of a lot of other British
Caribbean hybrids like Mikey Dread and Aswad and through to The Specials and
Fun Boy Three. This is kind of a delicate question but I wondered how yourself
and the early British black community responded to white people wanting to
integrate with your scene and from David
Rodigan wanting to
do his own soundsystem in Kingston and things like that. Did it flatter you
or did you want to protect it?
Jah Shaka 
You know that ska was a music that existed long time ago, the music of ska.
One of the famous people in it was Prince Buster in Jamaica. Blue Beat
Records. Prince Buster made “Judge Dread” and a lot of other songs. When he
came to England, it was white people that met him, not black, at the airport.
It was white people. We call them at that time skinheads. They wore small
pork pie hats, Crombie coats, Doctor Marten boots. They were meeting Prince
Buster. So you had a lot of people that recognized from ska music and came in.
Even the punk music, they recognized it from the early ska. Many groups like
Madness and all these groups that exist, they learned from reggae. UB40, all
these big groups, their parents were playing records in parties for them to
know, “Red, Red Wine,” all these songs. For them to know, their parents were
playing them. 
I knew David Rodigan  before he was famous. He used to come and
listen to soundsystem. We are playing now for 49 years. That’s the length of
time, nearly 50 years. Five decades. When Rodigan came, he saw us, sound
systems, to know about music. He study about music and some early people in
music business. Their names don’t come up often. John and Felicity Hassell.
They used to cut dubplates on the machine in a place named Barnes in England.
We used to meet David Rodigan there with these people. It was very tight
community at that time in reggae. When you had somebody like [mastering engineer] John Hassell, a
man named Graeme Goodall, and a man named [producer and arranger] Tony Ashfield, [who was] able to go
to Jamaica and put strings, violins and things onto John Holt music. It’s an
idea of some producers in London that were able to go to Jamaica with these
ideas too. So the ideas still work and it’s carrying on, regardless of who,
because the truth carries no color. The truth doesn’t have a color. It doesn’t
matter who spoke the truth, it’s if it’s true, and your inside will say it’s
true. There is no color barrier within our function in our playing of music.
As you can see from some crowd, it’s mixed.
Audience Member
Was that how you felt at the time, like in the early ‘60s and ‘70s?
Jah Shaka 
It was very difficult for black people, but when you was good at something,
the white people recognized you. When you’re good at something. If you was
playing football in school and they said the white guy should pick the team
and they knew you were a good footballer, he would pick you first because he
wants to win, not because of color. He wants to win. Because you have got that
skill, he would put you in his team. So when you’re skilful at something, you
are recognized more. You had to work hard to be recognized in those early
days. Yeah.
Audience Member
Thank you.
Jah Shaka 
OK.
Audience Member 
Hi. I’m very moved with everything you’ve shared with us and I wanted to ask
you about how your spiritual search has influenced your sound search? How
frequencies and that kind of approach to your tools with which you work have
informed you.
Jah Shaka 
Well, as you have said in that word spiritual, spiritual around us and to
accept spiritual understanding and put it into action, not just to know, to
put it into action. The topic of Africa, the topic of the Almighty, the most
high, Jah, Rastafari, these things are topics which we pass onto people which
is very important to me. Rastafari is not just a religion, it’s a way of life.
It’s a principle. It’s a way of living. The Bible says, “Do your work to let
others see that that might glorify God.” Not the person, for we are just a
tool. We are just a tool God uses to get to the people. All of us is tools.
You have gifts and you have talent. It’s up to each person to investigate
their talent and link it with the spiritual things in life. Link it with
nature. Yeah, it’s very important. Nature is a very important subject to link
music. 
It’s really a science to be able to receive message and transfer
message to people. Receive, transfer. Spiritually, that is what gives us the
inspiration and the knowledge and the understanding. You can know about the
world, but to understand what the world means, it’s a different thing. It’s
always investigation. Every day there is something to learn, each and every
day, when you’re spiritually linked. Yeah, make sure your mind is clear that
you can receive spiritual message to enlighten you, that you can make changes
where changes are necessary. Thank you.
Audience Member
OK, so we talked about
how bass is good for your body and how you have a message in the lyrics in the
music. I was wondering about the role of the siren in your music. I was
thinking maybe, tell me if I’m wrong, but it could be like
you have a siren on an ambulance to warn people about your message. Is it
something in the likes?
Jah Shaka 
Definitely. It’s like you’re throwing a spear. Yeah, it’s a warning and it causes people to think. It causes the mind to reflect. Very
important. In fact, we were playing with a soundsystem in Brixton before when
some speaker was on fire, in Brixton Town Hall. We play the record with the
siren to say, “Come quickly,” and it worked. It worked. (Laughter)
Audience Member 
Thank you.
Jah Shaka 
Yeah.
Audience Member 
Hi. Thanks. Hello. I’ve always been interested in how, in hindsight, how easy
it is to trace the lineage of reggae from (mimes fast drum beat) and then
slowing it down to (slower drum beat) and so on. I was wondering, at the
time, how conscious were you of that, and how much did you really see the
development happening, or did it seem to arrive in its fully fledged form?
Jah Shaka 
In the ‘60s, the music and lyrics were more dance. People were happy dancing.
In the ‘70s, it became more message. In the ‘70s, people used to sing about
what’s happening to them. Not American songs like you see on the radio and
sing back. They used to sing about, “Yes, I met Tom yesterday.” They put that
lyrics, or Gregory said, “I gave her the key to her front door.” Somebody like
[inaudible] said yes, “I was there the day when you gave her the key.” It’s more
reality music in the ‘70s. 
You have certain artists that come with messages
like Burning Spear, coming from the north coast, like Twinkle Brothers. You
have singers what are message singers and you have singers what sing reggae.
So you have different branches of reggae, different branches. Now you have
dancehall. Now you have bashment, but it’s a different branch. When you have a
tree and you break off all the branches, break off all, the root is still
there. The roots. Other things are there, but the root is dominant else you
don’t have a tree if you don’t have a root. That’s where we are really, to
make sure that we’re at the source, the source. Yeah, that’s where we stand.
Audience Member
Thanks, man.
Benji B 
Do we have to wrap it up? Yeah? I think it’s time. I’m sorry that we’ve run
out of time. I’m sure you’ll join me in saying that was amazing and to give
thanks to the Mighty Jah Shaka. Thank you.
Jah Shaka 
I’d just like to say something. I don’t know if any students are here.
Students of university or college? Two subjects are very important otherwise
than music. There are two important subjects; geography and history. It’s
very important because you can trace time. You can find out where it happened,
when it happened, how it happened and who did it. We can find out these things
by studying history and geography to find out where the countries are. Like,
when they say Christ came from Bethlehem. Do you know where Bethlehem is on
the map? There’s things to find out in geography. Do we know where the Nile
began, the river Nile, that people used to use as a road to transport ships to
bring to other countries? Abyssinia, the place that it was called before it is
called Africa. The place we now call Africa, that shape was Abyssinia before.
The history. When you study about these things, that is why now you have
students that study in the universities. They are finding out the truth.
Nowadays you have the internet and all these things where people can
communicate and find out things. But it is how you use what you have found out
because everyone has got a talent and a skill. The students going to college,
it will be very important for the future of this country and the future of the
world. We don’t know what country the next great leader will come from. I’m
sure you heard about Marcus Garvey and these people. Gandhi used to be in
contact with Marcus Garvey. Elijah Muhammad, which the Muslims speak of, was
in contact with Marcus Garvey. The Marcus Garvey philosophy spread amongst
many nations. There’s a philosophy that when people stick to those principles,
other people will see and it can carry on from generation to generation.
Because what I’m speaking about is thousands and thousands and thousands of
years of history to come to this stage today. Thousands of years of history.
It’s very important that the students keep up the good work in the school and
tell the children the same thing because they eventually will take up our
jobs. One love. Rastafari.
Benji B 
Have you got one song you can play us out with? You’re going to be around
tomorrow in the studio. Is that possible? I don’t know if we have time today. We’ll find out shortly because I know that a lot of
participants are DJing or performing live tonight. (Inaudible from audience member) Yeah, and if not, maybe we
can do something tomorrow. I’m sure we’d all love that if you could come to
the control room downstairs. Don’t forget, Shaka is playing on Saturday as
well and he’s going to give us something to... I need to hear some more music.
I don’t know about you, but just to finish off with. And let’s say thanks once
again. 
[applause]
(music: Jah Shaka – “My Prayer”)
