Southern hip-hop wouldn’t sound the way it does without Mannie Fresh. The Nola representative earned his stripes on the local DJ circuit in the late 1980s, before going on to become the primary production force behind the Cash Money Records empire. Laying down the entire beat palette on multiple LPs for B.G., Juvenile, Hot Boys, Lil Wayne, and Big Tymers, Mannie Fresh sculpted the big, bangin’, and brassy sound of the Southern bling-rap movement at its boldest and brightest. 
In a public conversation in New Orleans, Mannie Fresh discussed Nola rap history, his time with Cash Money Records, the effects and aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, and more.
[applause]
Jeff Mao 
It is our very, very… Our pleasure to welcome a legendary producer, DJ, New Orleans musical legend, Mr. Mannie Fresh.
Mannie Fresh 
Thank y’all.
Jeff Mao 
What’s up, sir? Thank you for being here.
Mannie Fresh 
Man. Thank you, thank you. Thank all y’all.
Jeff Mao 
I see everybody’s been sitting in the room has been listening to some of the
sounds coming from this little machine over here. What have we been listening
to just in the last few minutes?
Mannie Fresh 
Some of them was just some beats I did this week that’s what I was playing
earlier that came out my MPC [Music Production Controller]. And I got a collection of beats, I don’t know,
probably over a year. That’s on here. It’s probably about 200 beats right
here. I did maybe, I think, ten this week or whatever. I was amped about this.
Jeff Mao 
So a sneak preview of some future hits. Tell us, what do you usually work on?
What’s your preferred machinery? What’s your preferred method of creating?
Mannie Fresh 
I kind of don’t have one machine that I stick to, but I like vintage machines.
I kind of do the [E-mu] SP-1200, first MPCs, the EPS.
Jeff Mao 
Still?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah, still.
Jeff Mao 
After all these years, still?
Mannie Fresh 
I’m computer illiterate, basically. I don’t get the new programs. No
disrespect to them. I’m just not a Fruity Loop guy. [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
What is it about, besides the fact that you don’t want to deal with the
computers, but what is it about the sound of those machines that appeals to
you?
Mannie Fresh
The SP-1200 is an analogue machine, I don’t know, probably 12-bit, so it gives
you that real grimy, grimy sound. It can’t be duplicated. Everything today is
digital, is clean. And some songs, they need that. And for me to program, I actually
got to touch something. I can’t click on nothing. I got to touch it to feel
it, you know? Sometimes I’ll even use electric drums and MIDI them up to the
drum machine just to have that real drum feel. It’s pretty much on how you was
brought up. I was brought up programming with a drum machine. This era is a
different thing, it’s your MacBook and some headphones.
Jeff Mao 
So, I guess you sit down, you decide you’re going to make a beat. What’s the first
thing you do?
Mannie Fresh 
Wow. Most of the beats are, to me, is what I’m feeling that day. It’s an
expression of what I’m going through that day. If it’s gloomy, the beat will
probably sound gloomy. [laughs] If I’m happy, then the beat will probably sound happy.
You know how some people, I guess they have their little creative thing or
whatever. I kind of sit down everyday and do beats, so it’s really on what’s
going on with me emotionally. That’s what my beats turn out to… Put it like this,
I can’t wait until I run out of money, then go back in the studio. A lot of
cats, when they start recording it’s like, “OK, I’m out of money so now I
need to go do something.” It’s pretty much my job is what I love. I do it
everyday all day. You know, I’m in front my drum machine. It’s pretty much an expression
of what I was going through that day.
Jeff Mao 
Do you start with a rhythm track first, or do you have melodic things in your
head that, figures of things that you decide you want to put down?
Mannie Fresh 
The crazy thing, a beat could start with me in the middle of the night. I’ll
have a bassline in my head and get up and record it and go lay back down and
then finish it tomorrow. It’s not really, like I said, it’s not a process. I
can’t say I start with drums first or I start… I can have a hook in my head and the best thing I could do is probably write it down so I can remember it tomorrow and then start from there. The whole song might
come together. Some of the songs, to me, that’s been the biggest hits… The
biggest hits for me probably came together within five minutes. It was just
that I was listening to something and I was, “It need one more song,” and it
just all came together. I really don’t think I have a process. It’s just, I
don’t know, it’s madness. That’s all I can tell you. [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
When we talked to Walter [Ramsey], obviously, a lot of the conversation
focused on the lineage and the history as far as New Orleans music with the
brass band and everything like that. It’s definitely also very true in your
family as far as your background. I wonder if you might talk about that a
little bit, how you first got into music.
Mannie Fresh 
Well, my dad was a DJ, a street DJ. My Christmas gifts pretty much was
instruments. I got turntables, mixers, stuff like that. For years I never got
it. I was just, “What is that?” And I guess somewhere around 12, I got interested
in it, started messing with turntables, started messing with mixers, guitars
or whatever, keyboards. From there it just took off. My background is a
musical background. And even the heritage of this city is crazy as far as
Kermit Ruffins or whatever. We
went to high school together. We had band class together, and none of us
really took band class serious. We just was in there just doing what we do. It
was just kind of like, “OK, this is what you like.” I actually even tried to
take piano lessons, but it was more so of somebody trying to teach me Bach or
something and I’m just, “I don’t get it.” So that didn’t work for me. It was
like, “If I’m going to learn this, I’m going to learn it on my own.” I just
think even this city is the soul that go with it. It’s kind of like you’ve got
to have your own elements and everything got to be in place. That’s all.
Jeff Mao 
When you say your father was a street DJ, what sort of stuff was he doing?
Mannie Fresh 
When hip-hop came along, my dad was one of the first people that played hip-hop here. I just remember back in the day, my dad would bring home Battle of
the DJ trophies. I’m like, wow. As I got older he started bringing me on the
gigs. The first thing I fell in love with was the groupies. [laughs] I was like, “Wow,
I think I’m going to be a DJ.” [laughs] I’m not going to even say, music
kind of got my interest first. It was just all the attention that the DJ got.
It was like, “Wow, the party can’t rock without the DJ, everything is focused
around the DJ.” And it’s kind of like, I was, “Well, you know what? That’s the
spot where I want to be at in life.”
Jeff Mao 
What sort of stuff was he playing around you when you were a kid?
Mannie Fresh 
Marvin Gaye. Mostly soul. I could go on for forever with that, on Cameo, R&B music, Run DMC. I remember when “It’s Like That” came out and we had
the 12” and my dad played it and I was, you know, literally cursed. I was,
“This is the greatest sh-- in the world.” He was, “What you just said?”
[laughs] The crazy thing is you can ask anybody who was a neighbor in this
city that knew my dad, knew my family, they would be like, “Yeah, they threw block
parties all the time.” Anything that was hot around that time he played it. It
was just music from the ‘70s to the ‘80s, whatever went on, up until when,
like I said, when hip-hop first jumped off, it was kind of like I got
introduced to it through my dad.
Jeff Mao 
What neighborhood did you guys…?
Mannie Fresh 
In the Seventh Ward.
Jeff Mao 
I guess then, when did you first start doing your own parties and becoming a
part of the DJ community?
Mannie Fresh 
Junior high school. I would say my first time doing parties or whatever I was
in junior high school. It was kind of like my dad explained it to me, how
contracts go and just kind of go out there and fish around. I was kind of
doing it around my house, doing block parties. My first gig ever was a house
party. We had mad equipment already. I’m not going to tell you it went great,
because it didn’t. It’s nothing like having a reality check of somebody going,
“You suck!” [laughs] That kind of put me on game right there and made me
want to get it together even more so. I would say, truthfully, my first gigs
was in junior high school. I started with house parties.
Jeff Mao 
When did you turn the corner when people didn’t come up to you and tell you,
“You suck!”
Mannie Fresh 
I just thought you could just play records basically. I get it. You’ve got DJs
like that. It’s like, OK, hip-hop came along and you had all these DJs, like
Grandmaster Flash, that was doing breakbeats and that’s what the crowd wanted.
They pretty much wanted that show. It’s like, OK, you’ve got all this nice
equipment. You’re dressed the part, you got your glove on and all that. Like,
you going to be badass, and you’re just dropping one song after another.
[laughs] I just got, like I said, a brutal reality check of, “You know what?
You got to get your timing together, your skills and all that, it’s not just
playing records.”
Jeff Mao 
Tell me about New York Incorporated. What was that?
Mannie Fresh 
New York Incorporated was established by, of course, a guy who was from New
York, and they actually moved to New Orleans. They was one of the premier DJ
groups, light show, everything. I just pretty much had speakers, turntables.
New York Incorporated came with it. They had the ultimate light show. They had
all the breakbeats. I really never knew where some of these songs came from or
whatever. The guy, Denny D, who was the founder of New York Incorporated, when
he first came down, he introduced us to transforming and all that. We didn’t
know nothing about that. We just kind of was, “I can blend two records or
whatever.” All that was phenomenal. I remember around that time, it was this
group called Jam Patrol, Rockers Revenge. I’m just naming y’all New Orleans
history of DJ groups. Let me see who else? Brown Clown. A couple of groups or
whatever. But everybody decided to have this DJ battle for whatever who would
be street supremacy. This was probably in the early ‘80s, and New York
Incorporated was just getting established, but the guy, Denny D, he won the
competition, and that was my first time actually seeing him but I wasn’t with
New York Incorporated. But, after seeing everything that he did, I ain’t going to
even lie, I went home, copied it, bit his style or whatever, learned how to
transform, did all of that. I kind of got my little street cred was I was from
there, I was just going around just taking on anybody who wanted it with me.
It kind of got the attention of New York Incorporated. They were like, “This
young kid, he pretty much can do everything.” So New York Incorporated seeked
me out, and next thing you know, I was rocking with them. That went on for, I
don’t even know, probably ten years, ten years strong in this city.
Jeff Mao 
Were you known as Mannie Fresh even back then?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah, I’ve been Mannie Fresh forever. Fresh is even cool to say now again.
[laughs]
Jeff Mao 
It came back, it’s been so long.
Mannie Fresh 
It came back.
Jeff Mao 
One thing I read was an interview with you where you talked about your setup
back then doing parties, and I guess it was the prevalent style, not just a DJ
DJing with two turntables but with the 808 and the keyboards as part of
the whole thing. Very much like how old school cats in the Bronx used to do
with the beatbox and stuff. Can you talk about that a little bit, how that
came into being?
Mannie Fresh 
I just wanted to have something different from just the average DJ. If you see
a DJ, normally you see just two turntables and a mixer. I was, “What could I
do to bring another element to the game?” So I wind up getting the 808 and I
had this Moog keyboard that I got from my dad. The only thing I did all the
time was practice basslines. Pretty much I knew any song that came out, I
could play the bassline to it. I was like, “I wonder how this would turn out
at a party, if I ran beats off my 808 and ran some basslines with a hot
synthesizer.” The next you know it just caught on like wildfire. It was to the
point where people stopped asking me to play records. It was more like, “Can
you turn on the beat box and do that thing that you do?” Like I said, it was
the new element, and it kind of changed the hip-hop of New Orleans. It made a
lot of other DJs look into it where, it’s instruments, now you’ve got to go
hard. You can’t just bring turntables. I think that element right there even
gave me, I guess, the guts and everything to produce because it turned into
people going, “Man, we like what you doing. Why don’t you try to do your own
thing?” Eventually, I started making up my own basslines, making up my own
little music and my own drum patterns, and it just turned into producing.
Jeff Mao 
What was the first record that you produced?
Mannie Fresh 
Wow, man. I would say [Gregory D]. That was “Freddie’s Back” in ’87, ’88, I
think.
Jeff Mao 
And who is Gregory D?
Mannie Fresh 
He’s a New Orleans MC, that’s one of the, I would say, legends in New Orleans
or whatever. How that came to be, I was in the studio working for a record
label and I was doing some scratching on records, because that was the big
thing, was just somebody who happened to be in New Orleans, and they was like, “We want some
scratches on the record. Can you do them?” So I did that. They asked me, “Do
you know of any MCs, anybody that raps?” I was, “Yeah, I know this one guy
that’s hot in the streets.” And Gregory D was hot at the time. He was kind of
notorious for rocking talent shows, and he always won the talent show, you
know, found him, went high and low to find him and brung him back to the
studio. They was, “Y’all want to make a record?” It was like, some kids who
never did that, I was like, “Yeah.” “You got a drum machine?” I was, “Yep, got
a drum machine.” The rest is history. That’s New Orleans history right there.
Jeff Mao 
You guys actually formed a group then, you and Gregory D?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah, mm-hmm. 
Jeff Mao 
And put out a couple albums.
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah, we put a couple, I would say maybe three albums. One of them was on RCA.
That was probably the first rap record to come out of New Orleans, first artist to be signed to a major label from New Orleans.
Jeff Mao 
Even before that, though, the independent stuff that you guys did…
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah.
Jeff Mao 
There’s a track, “Buck Jump Time,” you don’t have that here.
Mannie Fresh 
“Buck Jump Time,” there’s elements of second line [brass band parade music] basically and 808. I just
took a 808 and thought of, “OK, what could we do that incorporates this city
and the music that came from it?” “Buck Jump” is pretty much a dance that came
from New Orleans that, it goes with second line. I couldn’t even tell you the
date. I would say it was probably the early ‘90s whenever when we done this song, but
whenever this song came on in the city it was chaos. They went crazy.
(music: Gregory D & Mannie Fresh – “Buck Jump Time”)
When you heard that right there.
Jeff Mao 
Let’s listen to a little bit of this.
[music continues]
So you’ve got the bassline from the sousaphone and…
Mannie Fresh 
Well, the bassline was pretty much like, I mean, the drum machine that I was
using at that time had maybe, I would say, four seconds of sample time. The
bassline came from one little element, and I kind of had to make notes from
it. The horn came from, I don’t even know where I found the hit from, but it
was an SP-12 and the SP-12 used the Commodore disk drive that was as big as
this mixer [points to DJ mixer], and if you ever seen a floppy disk in life,
it looked like a sandwich, basically. [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
What would you say is the birth of bounce music in the city? What’s the first
bounce record?
Mannie Fresh 
Wow. The first bounce record… Well, I would say recorded probably would be TT
Tucker. But bounce was in the club way before he recorded it, and the elements
of bounce is kind of like, it’s old school New York hip-hop. It’s basically
kind of like an MC and a DJ and it’s two break records. From New Orleans is
mainly, I would say, 808 breakbeat records. That’s the choice, but it’s more
of call and responses, MC, his job is to rock the crowd and keep your
attention. It’s going to be riddles, it’s going to be rhymes, and it’s going
to be more so, I’m going to say something, and if you learn the song, if you
heard it enough, you know what I’m feeling and everything. It was basically
the elements of hip-hop, how hip-hop got started. It’s just that down-south we
prefer 808 beats. As a DJ, his timing, breaking down an 808 beat, two
turntables or whatever it is, just an MC, or some MCs. It was groups, as far
as when bounce first started, the elements was kind of like Grandmaster Flash
and the Furious Five. You come in, everybody got their parts on time or
whatever and all that. It took practice to do these songs, but it was just the
raw, raw elements of how hip-hop got started. But it was around before T
Tucker. He was the first person that I would say, I wouldn’t even say it was
on wax, it was a cassette tape that just floated around this city like crazy.
Jeff Mao 
Now, the 808 was the key element to that, something that’s carried through a
lot of your music over the years. I guess, but for example, the sort of
records you’re talking about that came out of New York in the mid-’80s… There’s one
particular, I guess…
Mannie Fresh 
Yes. The Show Boys. The song was called “Drag
Rap.” It was so popular down-
south that it was one verse in this where one of the MCs referred to himself
as Trigger Man, but we always did call the song “Trigger Man.” They renamed
the song “Trigger Man,” and the crazy thing is, I remember the guys who made
the song, when they came down in New Orleans, they didn’t know it was that
popular throughout the south, and they was kind of singing songs, actually
they got booked at a concert. It’s crazy because everybody wanted to know who
it was or whatever, so pretty much the whole city at the concert, they singing
all these songs, all the previous songs that they’ve done before this and it’s
kind of like you could hear crickets. The crazy thing is, nobody in the crowd
even knew it was them. They was just, “Well, who the hell is this? This just
some random group they put up here?” They go through three or four songs and
nobody is paying attention to them. And then when this song dropped, the club went
crazy. The whole spot, damn. I was, “Dude, this song, you can’t do no wrong.
You can sing this 12 times.” The nuts thing about this, back in the ‘80s and
the ‘90s, you had to play this record at least seven times, at least seven
times a night. You know what I’m saying? Really, you had to play this record,
and I’m not exaggerating, at least seven times.
Jeff Mao 
The whole record or just the break part in the middle?
Mannie Fresh 
The whole record. It kind of got into, OK, somebody flipped it over and
figured out, “Oh, the instrumental is even hotter.” [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
Because it’s drag rap, it’s dragnet rap, right?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah.
Jeff Mao 
It’s story rap. It’s kind of crazy.
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah. From the relationship the song kind of grew. It went to Memphis. You know what
I’m saying? It kind of went throughout the south. It went from, well, even the
Midwest a little bit. It hit Saint Louis or whatever, and the song just became
this phenomenal sample. Like, if you was doing a bounce record, you had to use that
song. It was kind of like the crazy thing is the dudes who, like I said,
originally made it, never knew the song was ever that popular.
Jeff Mao 
There’s a story of how you got into music that I kind of can’t believe, so you
have to confirm this. 
Mannie Fresh
OK.
Jeff Mao 
That you were going to college.
Mannie Fresh 
Uh-huh. [affirmative]
Jeff Mao 
What happened? You were supposed to be at college? What happened?
Mannie Fresh 
I can’t believe you found that out. [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
Where were you going?
Mannie Fresh 
SUNO, actually. I was supposed to be in college and I had financial aid, but I
decided that I was going to go to California to make a record. I was, “You
know what? I’m just going to go to California and take my chances.” Packed up
my suitcase, nothing but records or whatever and a drum machine. For two
semesters my parents thought I was in college, but I was kind of like in the
crack motel or whatever. I took an internship at RCA, when I started
programming drums, with a drum machine or whatever, walked into a studio,
asked for a job cleaning up or whatever, gave me a job. I used to sit there
with my drum machine. And pretty much what used to come through the door was
country music, but I remember one particular time the drummer didn’t show up.
It was some country music or whatever. So I was like, “I got a drum machine, I
can program the drums however y’all want them.” They was just like, “Well what’s a
drum machine?” So I wind up plugging up my drum machine, doing like this one
beat. [beatboxes simple hip-hop beat] They was, “Wow, that’s close to
the drums. That’s all we need!” So for my next, I don’t know, probably three
weeks in California, I was programming country music. I was like, “It pays the
bills, I’m good with it.” [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
Did those records come out?
Mannie Fresh 
I don’t even know. I couldn’t even tell you who the artists were. I was just,
“What you want me to do? How do you want this to sound? Do you want a drum
roll? Do you want a tom?”
Jeff Mao 
What happened then with the internship eventually?
Mannie Fresh 
Eventually, well, my dad found out first, and being a true dad he was just
like, “Look, I don’t want to even be in this sh-- when it comes down.” He was,
“I’m going to let you follow your dream, whatever, but don’t say I knew, because your
mom is going to find out eventually.” It was kind of like how you have that
thing and your mom and them show up at school to check on you? That’s what
happened. My mom showed up at school to check on me and she was, “Where you
at?” At the time it wasn’t no cell phones or nothing like that. I heard from a
friend, he was, “Hey, your mom is out here checking on you.” I’m like, “Dude,
for real?” You know what I’m saying? I’m like, “You know what? I guess it’s
time for me to come home and tell her the truth.” I pretty much had to come
home, break it down. It was like, “You know what? I’ve just been doing
whatever my dream was. I really did not want to go to college.” I’m not saying
that nobody should take that for what it is, but I knew what I wanted to do in
life. I pretty much knew. It was more of, that was my parents’ dream. They was
just like, “You know what? We going to put you in school. Do this thing.” I
kind of knew. I ain’t going to say “Kind of,” 100% I knew this is
what I was going to do. This was it for me.
Jeff Mao 
Now, was it through the internship that Gregory D got signed to RCA also?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah. On that internship, I met some good connections with RCA. At first it
started out with SWV. SWV was signed to Universal at the time and I did some
drum programming on that. At the time, the president was this guy named Skip
Miller. I kind of got close to him from everything that I was doing, from cleaning up to doing beats to whatever.
I was, “Hey, I’ve got a guy who I’ve been doing some songs with in New
Orleans. Would you give him a shot?” He was, “Hey, we’ll give y’all a shot.”
The crazy thing is even then I didn’t know about budgets, didn’t know how they
work or whatever, and they put us in the studio with some other producers, and
I pretty much already knew, with the other producers, everything that they was
doing or whatever. When I tell you how a session started out, I always say the
guy came into the studio on a skateboard and by the time we was finished he
was in a nice Cadillac. [laughs] He pretty much spent the whole budget for
the album or whatever, but, I didn’t know what was going on at the time, you know?
It was a learning lesson. I wouldn’t take nothing back that happened to me, in
all honesty.
Jeff Mao 
I also read that you had wound up in Chicago at one point too, working with…
Mannie Fresh 
Right after that I wind up in Chicago working with Steve
Hurley. Steve Hurley is kind of like the father of house
music, wound up doing some programming with him. It was more so, same deal. He
wind up doing a remix for me and Gregory D, and he was just, like, “Well, I
don’t think I can finish it.” I was, well, give me an example of house music,
what it is and what it sounds like. He sent me all these songs and all of them
had, [imitates 4/4 beat] “Doop, doop, doop, doop, doop-tss, doop-tss, doop-tss, doop-tss…’
I’m, “OK, another one?” “Doop-tss, doop-tss, doop-tss.” I was, “Anything else?” It was
like, “Doop-tss, doop-tss, doop-tss.” [laughs] I was, “All right, I can finish it up. I
can probably even put a few rolls or some snare rolls or something in it.” He
was, well, you know, “I got these other projects going on. If you could
program them drums real quick.” I was, “Man, honestly, I could do this in my
sleep.” [laughs] At the time that’s pretty much what house music sounded
like. Everything had that “Doop-tss, doop-tss, doop-tss, doop-tss.” There was nothing but a
909 and a clap on top of it. I learned a lot of business from him of, “Hey,
man, you’ve got to take care of your business. You can’t just do music.” At a
young age I was so in love with music, I wasn’t paying attention to nothing
but give me a drum machine and I love what I do. Even then it was big songs.
Steve Hurley was remixing Prince songs and stuff like that. I was just, “Well,
I’ll do the drums.” And I wouldn’t say he did anything to me or whatever, but I
just wasn’t paying attention to how big those songs were. I was just like, “Oh, I
love this. I’m just like the programmer or whatever.” Then when you get older
and you think about, “Wow, that was the purple dude song, it’s Prince!” [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
From there you wound up back here?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah.
Jeff Mao 
So you decided you’re through with school, through with the internship. You
were in Chicago. You came back home.
Mannie Fresh 
Yep. Wind up here, started DJing again, back in the club or whatever,
doing my club scene thing. And eventually, started remixing. Basically
everything that was coming out. If I got a cappella to something, I put my own
version to it. It started catching on in the streets of New Orleans. It would
be like, “Oh, dude, you got the Mannie Fresh mix. You gotta get the Mannie
Fresh mix.” It was getting the attention of a lot of people. It was more so
labels and people going, “Hey, you should do your own thing, man, you’ve got
something.” Around that time bounce was starting to take off, and it was kind
of one-dimensional. It was just like I said, it was the birth of hip-hop. It
was just a DJ and some MCs, and I just decided to like, “OK, I’m going to put some
music behind this, put some breaks in it, scratching,” whatever and all that,
and I think that elevated it to a whole other level. Like, wow, you could
really take elements of this, and… Honestly, I was kind of listening to
everything. If you listen to “Back That Azz Up,” [by Juvenile ft. Mannie Fresh] it’s really classical music.
Jeff Mao
I was going to say. It had that kind of…
Mannie Fresh 
It was kind of like that classic… I was, “Well, what can I do that…” I was
thinking that’s going to catch everybody, all around the board. I was like, “If I
put this 808 “Trigger Man” beat behind it and I put some classical music on
top of it, I think I’ll catch everybody and it will wind up being a
big hit.”
Jeff Mao 
I guess that’s when you met up as far as the early days of Cash Money Records.
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah. The first generation of Cash Money was pretty much more of DJ type
records. Cash Money was a bounce label before it was a rap label. It was just
all bounce artists, underground bounce artists from New Orleans, and the first
generation of it was more, like I said, it was DJ records. It was, let’s just
say I took an 808 loop and I found “Wishing On a Star,” [by Rose Royce] the beginning of that,
the music. I would loop that on top of a 808 beat, and it’s a hood classic,
and put some keys on it. The crazy thing about it was I was the digging-a-crate-type person then. I already knew nobody in this city ever heard that
song. You know what I’m saying? It was just like, “Wow, what is that?”
Jeff Mao 
From the early days of Cash Money, what sort of artists came in that took it
to the next level of what it became?
Mannie Fresh 
The late, great Magnolia Shorty. She was signed to Cash Money. U.N.L.V., this
guy Pimp Daddy, Lil Slim, B.G., early, he was signed. B.G. and Wayne were
signed… I don’t know if you kind of googled him, they look like, I don’t know,
smurfs or whatever. [laughs] They were signed to Cash Money since they were,
I don’t know, probably 12 or something. The early generation and the early
songs, just like I said, it was based on bounce music. It wasn’t really even
based on rap. This guy, Kilo G, he was a rap artist, Mr. Ivan, also a rap
artist, and I guess everybody was bouncing at one time in New Orleans. It just
got to the point where it was, “Dude, it’s just way overdone right now.” It
was, “What can we do? What’s going to be the next element?” B.G. turned out to
be a pretty good rapper. We was just like, “Well, let’s try a rap record, but we’ll try
to have bounce elements to it.” The first rap record that came out kind of on
Cash Money, was this song called “Uptown
Thang” by B.G., and the streets loved it. It took off. From there, it was just like, “OK, I don’t know about
this bounce thing.” But Juvenile came after him. And when Juvenile came, it was
more his raps were different from anybody else that was doing bounce music.
His raps weren’t that call and response type thing. It was more, he had a
story to tell. It had story form to it. It was like, “Wow, that brings a whole
other element to it.” It was more so of the 400
Degreez album [Juvenile’s third studio album], he pretty much knew those songs. It was like somebody came to you and they sang
all those songs to you. When he was rapping them to me, my wheels was
spinning, because I was like, “Wow, I’ve never heard nobody from New Orleans
with that kind of flow.” If you heard the song “HA,” you already know it was, damn,
I’m just looking at him, like, “Damn, wow, I’m thinking of a beat right now.”
I was, “Y’all got to sign him.” That just brung it to a whole ‘nother element,
because nobody ever heard that before. I think that’s, to me, on 400 Degreez
is well, I ain’t going to say most, but one of the, I guess, elite albums from
the south. When you think of artists from the south or whatever and you start going into
categories, like what would be ten of the hot albums, I would definitely put
400 Degreez in it.
Jeff Mao 
Speaking of the roster and the artists on Cash Money who really took it to
that next level at that time, you know, with the Hot Boys [Lil Wayne, Juvenile, B.G. and Turk]; I
wonder, with the four of them, as a producer, just musically, what about each
one of them did you find distinctive? What did each one of them bring to the
table in terms of personality or style or chemistry to make that whole sort of
clique really and take off?
Mannie Fresh 
In all honesty, it wasn’t really about the four of them that made it great. It
was more of a team effort that made it great. If you have team, like it feels,
there’s really nothing that you can’t do. It was friendly competition with
them. That’s what made the songs so great. It was kind of like if somebody
heard, if Wayne did a verse and Juvie thought it was, “You know what, man? He
killed me on that,” he went and rewrite his verse. Then Wayne came back and
said, “Well, man, why did he have to rewrite his verse? I’m going to rewrite
mine.” The friendly competition of it made it a great group, and I just think
even the elements that they brung, at the time you had Juvie, who was the
older guy but he was the lyricist. You had Wayne, who had, I don’t know, his
characters that he did and his sound effects were nuts. And you had B.G. who was
the streets. He had that street element that was crazy. You had Turk, the dude
who all the girls liked. You know what I’m saying? You pretty much had the
perfect group.
Jeff Mao 
Well, on a track like “We On Fire,” or something like that, everybody rhymes two bars. It’s kind of an unusual structure for a hip-hop song. It’s usually more, you take a verse, you take a verse, you take a verse,
but it’s so kind of integrated…
Mannie Fresh 
Even with that, it was kind of like, I came from the old school, even though
with me producing, and what I used to make them do, I ain’t going to say
“Make,” but I was, “Why don’t y’all listen to Grandmaster Flash and the
Furious Five, like Rock Steady Crew? Just kind of listen to how they go in and
go out; and how they have elements that make the songs so much hotter or
whatever.” Even when it came to the Hot Boys, I was, “How can we make four
guys sound incredible?” It can’t be, “OK, you rap, then I rap, then I rap.”
It’s kind of like, “OK, everybody’s seen that before.” But hip-hop kind of,
even though everybody had the element of what I said, the old school rap, we
forgot about it. So I was like, “OK, if I can introduce that back with new
beats or whatever, it would be hot.” It was more of me taking elements of old-school hip-hop, going, “OK, if I could put new beats over this and y’all actually get it…” Like I said, the rest is history.
Jeff Mao 
I’m also curious to know, just from that time, No Limit broke nationally
before Cash Money. What was the dynamic between the two labels in Louisiana at
the time?
Mannie Fresh 
The thing of it is, it was tension. I know you used “Dynamic,” but it was
tension, because it was the song that Cash Money put out, called “It’s An
Uptown Thang” and “[I’m] Bout It.” Basically, it was like
somebody come and visit you and took what you was doing. “Bout It” was hot in
the streets, but it was something that Cash Money created. It was more so of
Master P at the time was living in California or something, came down and
heard what was going on, and it was like, “OK, I’ll take that and I’ll go
back.” Next thing you know, we hear this song, “Bout It Bout
It,” and it’s nationwide and it’s like, “OK,
you’re not going to say thank you or nothing? You just kind of took that and
ran with it.” The good thing about it was it made everybody on Cash Money
angry and hungry. You know what I’m saying? It was like, “I can’t believe he
did that.” It made them want to, “You know what? The only revenge we going to
get is we going to have to get on the national level. We going to have to get
out there. We going to have to work twice as hard and make songs twice as
better or whatever, to get on that level.” Because when “Bout It Bout It” came out it
was like Master P was just a phenomenon or something. What he did was, I don’t
even know. I mean, y’all know Master P. Come on. Everybody was, “He couldn’t
do no wrong.” Anything that he said, it was just like, damn, Master P could
breathe on a record. There was the new Master P, and he’s just… [grunts /
laughs] He dropped something every day. The crazy thing, I guess, what
happened, just like I said, it was more so of he came to New Orleans, which he
is a New Orleans native but he wasn’t living in New Orleans at the time. He
came to New Orleans and pretty much bit off all the slangs and whatever, it
was more what Cash Money created, and just kind of ran off with them and made
bank.
Jeff Mao 
At the time you’re doing all the music for all the artists on the label?
Mannie Fresh 
Yep.
Jeff Mao 
During those years, what’s a day in the life of Mannie Fresh like?
Mannie Fresh 
I’m kind of still the same way. I’m a studio junkie. I would be, “What time
y’all getting to the studio?” That’s me. I’m at the studio. I’m the first one
there, the last one to leave. That was pretty much my life all the time. I
live, breathe music. If I’m not DJing, I’m in the studio. It’s kind of like
nothing really excited me to, I guess, lift my head up off of my drum machine.
It could be a murder going on in the room and they just be like, “He’s not
stopping what he’s doing. That dude programming drums. He not tripping.” Cash
Money sessions was basically a party all the time. The earlier Cash Money
sessions, it was drinks, girls, whatever and all that. I guess it never
distracted me, because I think certain songs kind of need that element, but
it’s really only you and I guess what your focus is. I was always focused on
what I was doing, and a day in the life of me is that.
Jeff Mao 
Maintaining that pace of having to create that volume of music, you know,
doing entire albums for multiple artists at the time wasn’t something that was
difficult for you at all I guess then?
Mannie Fresh 
No.
Jeff Mao 
I’m sorry, go ahead.
Mannie Fresh 
I would say, I guess a lot of cats might burn out on it. I’ve always said
this: When I stop having fun, then I’ll stop. As long as I’m having fun with
what I’m doing, I enjoy it. I guess fun brings creativity, and if you surround
yourself with good people, then you’re going to always be creative. It’s like
if something is negative in your life, you pretty much got to move it out your
life or whatever, or you going to start… To make a long story short, if you
hang around trash, you’re going to start smelling like trash.
Jeff Mao 
Now, you also made the transition to appearing on records and doing some Big
Tymers [Mannie Fresh’s group] stuff. I guess tell us a little bit about that.
Mannie Fresh 
Even that wasn’t purposely. It was just more so of, “OK, I’m just rapping
all of a sudden.” The next thing you know, I’m, “OK, I’m in front of a
camera.” I never set out to be that producer or whatever, “OK, I want to be
in the limelight,” or, “I want to be that one,” or whatever. I kind of look back sometimes.
It was earlier Cash Money stuff, and I still kind of look like the oddball.
[laughs] If you on a sofa and everybody else has got on 12 chains and you’re
just sitting in the corner like, yeah, [laughs] They’re like, “Well, what about you?”
You’re like, “Yeah, I want to save the ozone layer and the whales,” and
everybody else is like, “Yeah, my earrings cost 50.” [laughs] I would say I
never really set out to do that. It just came along with everything with
music.
Jeff Mao 
But the Big Tymers were hugely successful too, though.
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah, but the Big Tymers, even the raps that I was saying, most people were,
“Well, did you think of that or whatever?” I was, “No, I just said what I felt
that day.” You know what I’m saying? It’s like even right now if I go in the
studio, yes, there are some things that I’ll write down, but for the most part
I don’t write them down. I just kind of say what I feel. And I feel like
that’s the best songs anyway, you just being true to you. I’ve never said that
I could rap, never said I was the MC, but I’m good at rhyming. [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
Of those years, what do you take from that experience of being with Cash Money
and helping build it to what it is still today, which is a huge entity in the
music?
Mannie Fresh 
I don’t have no gripes with Cash Money, because Cash Money is pretty much the
label, and I know in my heart, it’s my DNA or whatever, to a certain degree, you know, I
helped build it. You’ve got to look at it. It’s like planting a tree. You
start with a seed, and then you grow. I look at it like a lot of artists that
I’ve done songs with early in their careers, they come from me. That’s good
enough for me, to know that, “Wow, you had a hand in that guy’s career.” He
started somewhere and you did your job. Look where he is right now. It’s kind
of like something that Jay-Z said, “If you really made me, then make another
one of me.” Basically, what that means is, I don’t really feel like I was a
one-hitter-quitter or whatever, because that could go on and on. After I left
Cash Money, Jay-Z’s first hit was with Mannie Fresh. A couple of T.I. hits was
with Mannie Fresh. I’ve done some big songs for some big people, and God-willing,
I’m going to do some more. I don’t have no gripes with them. It’s business.
That’s what it is when it came down to Cash Money. I was so in love with
music, and I’ve said it in interviews, I wasn’t paying attention to my
business, and I wasn’t really paying attention to what it was generating. When
it got time for it to count, it wasn’t like they stepped up and did what they
were supposed to do.
Jeff Mao 
What kind of terms are you on with folks from the label nowadays?
Mannie Fresh 
We speak, that’s about it. It’s like, “Hi, hello.” A quick, “Hi, hello.”
Jeff Mao 
What sort of advice would you pass along based on that experience?
Mannie Fresh 
I would say, definitely in this, you have to pay attention to your paperwork.
Don’t get caught up in that trap of, “I love music so much to…” Well, I would say
this, let me rephrase that. Don’t do homeboy business. Homeboy business is,
“That’s my boy, he would never do me that.” Yes, he would, because money is
the root to all evil. Some people can’t handle it. You could grow up with
somebody, and these are guys who, like I said, I grew up with, been knowing
them pretty much all my life or whatever, but when money came, things got
strange. And I say that to anybody: I can’t do homeboy business no more. I’d just
rather you just pay me for what I’m doing and I’ll give you what I owe you and
we good. Other than that, we can’t really talk about it because like right
now, there’s some guys in here that’s friends with somebody for a long time or
whatever and you’re thinking about doing something, but when it really comes
to you saying, “OK, I’m going to bring my attorneys in,” and they’re like, “Why you
got to do that?” Because you have to do that. That’s what it is.
Jeff Mao 
Emotionally, how did you sort of adjust with that change in your career?
Mannie Fresh 
I would say emotionally it hasn’t done nothing to me. It’s a learning lesson.
Everything in life is a learning lesson. On top of that, if you sit around and
pout about stuff, you’ll never be who you’re supposed to be in life. You’ll
never get where you’re supposed to get. So I just look at it as a stepping stone,
just another obstacle I’ve got to get over, and keep it moving.
Jeff Mao 
I also kind of wanted to touch on one thing, just in terms of the way the
music was being interpreted at its height with that Cash Money stuff and the
stuff coming out of the south in recent years. For a while anyways, people up
north would get defensive or feel territorial about how hip-hop from down-
south had more or less taken over and become more or less the popular form. I
just wanted to get your thoughts on that, because you obviously have so much
reverence for the history of the music. How did it make you feel to have sort
of like, all the New York people, whoever, griping a little bit about the guys
down south coming up?
Mannie Fresh 
See, what had happened was, [laughs] while everybody else was beefing, the south was
making songs about, I guess, partying or whatever and having a good time. The
east and the west were so busy with “I hate you” and “I hate you.” While all
that was going on, we started making records about, “You know what? Hey, we
just want to have a good time.” And good-time music just started taking off. I
don’t even see why nobody else can’t figure it out, what happened. They just
like, “Well, the south kind of just came through here and took over.” Even
right now you still kind of have those beefs from the east and the west. It’s
like, “Wow, if you all figure it out and stop beefing, it’s almost like y’all
can get back on.” The south is kind of like, the home of the independent label.
We know how to hustle, like our life depend on it. You know what I’m saying? We
going to talk you into buying records, if we’ve got to aggravate you to the
point of, “Hey man, buy this tape, buy this tape.” And we come from that, from
selling them out the trunk or whatever. Everybody else is looking for that
hand. They’re like, “OK, we need a label to do this and we need to get set
up, we need to do this and all that.” That’s like talking, I don’t even know,
gibberish, to me. If I go to a label and they say, “Well, we’ve got to set up your
video and we need this and we need that.” I’m like, “Why? Why do we have to do
that? We could just put it out and see what happens. If it don’t work, we
going to put another song out.” That’s kind of like the south model. We just
keep putting records out until something sticks. Everywhere else is more of,
they take it as, “Well, you’ve got to have the proper setup, you’ve got to
have somebody to work the record, you’ve got to do this, you’ve got to do
that.” That’s your job. You’ve got to do all of that. You’ve got many faces
down south. You’re the CEO, you work the record, you’re the DJ, you’re all of
that. [laughs] I think that’s the difference. Most people down south, their life
depend on, and the bills and everything else depend on, them selling them
records, so they’re going to find a way to make it happen.
Jeff Mao 
I wonder also, just with this particular city, just with how S&P [Social Aid and Pleasure] clubs have that sort of tradition of community and people sort of
coming together; if that sort of just is something that’s also, around here
anyways, ingrained as far as people supporting local musicians and acts and hip-hop crews.
Mannie Fresh 
That’s all down-south. I just gave y’all an example of homeboy business, but
we do have one good thing kind of like we’re artists in the south. We leave
the people who we need to leave out our conversations out. It’s kind of like,
if I went to David Banner, I could get a beat from David Banner. I don’t need
to talk to somebody at his label or whatever or nothing like that, because it
becomes confusion when I got to talk to who before I talk to you? He could
just tell me yes or no, and collaborations down-south kind of happen, “Oh, you
in my town, what you doing? Let’s go to the studio.” And that’s all it is. I’m
going to give you back that favor. “I’ll do your song, you do my song.”
There’s no paperwork or whatever, and that’s the good thing about down south.
You’ll have somewhere where, let’s just say I could probably never get a song
from Mary J. Blige without paying Mary J. Blige. She’d be like, “I don’t care
who you are. I need my money.” The good thing about down-south, and we really
care about our art, it’s just like if an artist fall off and you really like him, you’re
going to do everything that you can do to help him. You know, we really care. “Hey man,
you had a bad album? Anything you need from me, I got you.” Especially if I’m
a fan. You know, it’s like, OK, you’ve got elements from that guy too. You took some
of his elements to make your music. So I think we have that element. We have
that over a lot of other artists coming from the east and the west. We
actually don’t put the politics into when it comes to artists. Even around
here, I could go to Trombone Shorty, “Hey man, I’m in a studio.” I could go to
the Stooges [Brass Band], “I’m in the studio right now, I need some horns.” I could go to
the dude who’s shooting right now, they did my video. I just called them up,
“Hey, dude, I’m ready to shoot a video.” “Where do you want us to be at?” You
know what I’m saying? It’s real life. They actually really shot the video.
They was like, “Hey, give me this camera and we going to do it.” And I was like, “I’m going to
have the camera then.” And we shot the video.
Jeff Mao 
Now, yesterday you told me you were on the set of
Treme [TV series], right?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah.
Jeff Mao 
Tell us a little bit about your perspective on the show and what your
involvement is.
Mannie Fresh 
Actually, I’m playing myself on the show, and what I was doing…
Jeff Mao 
It’s not like somebody…
Mannie Fresh 
It’s not a character. I’m actually playing myself on the show. The funny thing
happened was, if you’ve seen the show you know it has its serious moments and
it kind of has, every now and then it might have a little comedy in it or
whatever. But it was more so of, they asked me first to do… What did I have to
do first? Oh, an answering machine. Basically, it was somebody making a phone
call to me about getting a beat. They was just like, “Could you record yourself? How would
your voicemail sound?” I was, “Do you really want me to do it how my
voicemail?” He was, “Yeah.” But they had a script, and I kind of read it, and I
was like, “No, that’s not what I would say.” They’re, like, “Say it how you would
say it.” Basically, I want to say I said something, I’m just going to give it
to y’all raw, like what I said. I was like, “Yo, what’s up, this is Mannie
Fresh and your baby mama’s in the background.” I was like, “On the real, if
you’re calling me to borrow money, I think you should just hang up. If you’re
calling me and you owe me money and you’re not ready to pay me back, I think
you should just hang up.” I was like, “If you’re calling me to spend some
money, leave a message. Bye, bitches.” When I did it, the guy was, “Wow!”
[laughs] He was like, “You know what? We’re going to write you a couple more parts
in the show.” [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
Yeah, you got the walk-on part. I asked Walter the same thing with the show.
As far as it portraying the experiences of people here, post-[Hurricane] Katrina, what was
the experience like for you? Where were you at the time?
Mannie Fresh 
When that happened I was on tour in Canada. The crazy thing is I wasn’t really
taking that serious, because anybody around here could tell you, we done had
hurricane threats so many times until we just like, “You know what? We just
going to go get drunk. Nothing’s going to happen.” That was just the
attitude we had around New Orleans. Like I said, I was in Canada and heard on
the new or whatever, they was like, “OK this is going to be the big one. This one
is going to wipe New Orleans out.” I was just like, “Nah, man, we going to be
all right.” After the hurricane actually hit, I was, “Man, this sh-- is
serious.” So I started making phone calls, couldn’t get nobody in New Orleans,
so I go to the counter at the airport in Canada trying to get back home, and
this lady just killed me. She was, “New Orleans is wiped off the map.” [laughs] She
just made it gloomy, it was just horrible, like she was, “There is no more New
Orleans. Nothing. Everything is wiped off the map.”
Jeff Mao 
I thought Canadians were nice.
Mannie Fresh 
I was, “Damn, wiped off the map?” She was, “Yeah.” To make matters even worse,
she was, like, “Everybody drowned.” [laughs] By that time, me and the dudes
that I’m with, I’m like, “Damn!” So you start thinking about your family and
everything. I was, “Everybody drowned?” She was like, “Everybody drowned. The
city is wiped off the map.” I’m like, “Well, fly us anywhere close to New
Orleans.” We wind up flying into Dallas or whatever, and I’m thinking, “OK,
I’ll finally get in touch with my family.” They’re in Houston. I was, “OK, I’m
going to drive down to Houston or whatever.” I started making phone calls, you
know, as far as insurance stuff or whatever, checking on my house or whatever, and my car,
and they telling me the same thing. I was, “Yeah, I left my car at the airport
before I left.” Before I could say anything, the lady is, “The airport,
gone. Your car, gone. Where do you want us to send the check?” I was like,
“Damn!” Just like I said, I called on my house to check. I was, well, you
know, “I’m just calling, if I got to start a claim early.” They’re like, “Your
house gone.” I was, “Damn! Really? It’s that serious?” It really didn’t sink
in to me because, like I said, I was on the road and if you can’t see something… I remember finally when I
settled down, I was watching the news, and I see all these people stuck in the
Superdome or whatever. I was, “Man, it is real serious.” I mean, it’s
indescribable. I guess that’s when, to me, I would say that’s kind of a
turning point for me, because it made me realize that family before
everything, because you take things for granted a lot of times. Because at
that time, I was cool. Like I said, I had just left Cash Money. I had an album
out. I was in Canada. I’d done something they’d never done. I was touring
different places that they never been, so I was like, “Well, I’m happy. I’m making
good money and I’m doing this.” This happens and you kind of think that that
would never happen to you, nobody around you or whatever. Then you see certain
things, and I just remember feeling like this dark feeling over me by seeing
what was going on in the Superdome. And I was, “This is a city in the United
States and it’s getting treated like it was a third world country or somewhere.”
Nobody’s really coming to the aid, nobody’s doing nothing or whatever, and to
know people, where you could actually… Because pretty much everybody in this
city knows everybody, it’s a small city. When you’re watching the news and you
actually see a few people that you know stuck somewhere and there’s nothing
you could do about it. That’s like family to you as well. Like I said, it just
taught me a lesson right then and there. I’m like, you know what? If I could
live some more on this planet, I would definitely put my family before
everything.
Jeff Mao 
How long did you stay in Houston for?
Mannie Fresh 
Man, I actually still have a house in Houston. I wind up thinking that I was
going to live there. I was like, “Pretty much nothing to go back to.” The
silly thing that happened, me being in Houston as long as I was, everybody
will tell you here, we had kind of like this shut-out from New Orleans for
almost a month. They wasn’t letting nobody in the city or whatever. So I’m
thinking, “OK, I started my process. Everything is cool or whatever.” I
pretty much live on the outskirts of New Orleans, and when I finally get to go
home, I’ve already did my insurance claim and all that. When I finally get to
go home, I get to my neighborhood is trees blowing, kids playing, my house is
straight. Nothing really never happened. It was more so of I was like, “You
know what? I think I’m going to stay in Houston for a while.” I’ve kind of
been back and forth ever since, but this is home for me, and anybody around
here could tell you, you see me everywhere. I kind of float around.
Jeff Mao 
From spending time here, how do you see things have recovered or coming back?
Mannie Fresh 
You got places in New Orleans, dude, where it looks like the storm just hit.
If you visit it, they going to make it look nice for you. If you stand in this
area around here, it looks like a hurricane never hit, but if you kind of go
on the Ninth Ward or Seventh Ward or whatever, you would think the hurricane
just hit yesterday. There’s a lot of areas where it looks like, like I said,
it just hit yesterday. Everybody is, “Where the money went?” But that’s
Louisiana politics. Hey, nobody ever knows where the money at around here.
Jeff Mao 
I guess, just as far as in recent years, you’ve said in interviews that you’ve
stayed a little bit low-key because of certain things, the adversity that
you’ve endured. I just wondered if you could touch on that at all.
Mannie Fresh 
I guess pretty much with my sister getting, the violent way it happened, my
sister pretty much got murdered here a couple of, maybe two or three years ago
here, and I definitely right then and there kind of made up my mind that I was
done with New Orleans. But I always say through the help of just meeting some
young people here… Like, I don’t know, the Stooges, the dude, B-Mike, who shot my
video or whatever, his crew… They kinda, I’m just going to say it was more of a blessing.
They made me kind of rethink it. There’s still some positive creative people
here, but something like that will make you feel that way for a second. I
mean, when that happened, just think about it like this: When everything in
your life is going good, you kind of think that you’re untouchable. Well, you
feel that way, consciously. You don’t even know you feel that way. I kind of
had this whole thing of, life is great; you know what I’m saying? Nothing
can’t touch me. When that happened with my sister, it put me in a dark place.
I didn’t want to do music. I didn’t want to be nowhere around nobody who had
anything to do with New Orleans. Because what’s crazy to me, I felt like I
knew the streets. I know the streets. I know everything about the streets, so
it kind of was like, it came full circle of, it made me conscious of some of
the things that I was saying in rap songs and everything. Where I was like,
“Damn! This is the same crazy sh-- that I used to say in songs.” But you never
think it would knock on your door and come to you. It was more so of me
growing up and just… I don’t know. It just changed me as a person or whatever.
Put it like this: I’m at peace with it now. I could talk about it. At one time
I wouldn’t talk about it. You couldn’t even get me to touch a drum machine or
do music or whatever, because truthfully, my sister was my biggest fan. To her
I couldn’t do no wrong; anything that I did or whatever. It was just like
somebody’s who’s your soul and the closest person to you. If I had something… Put it like this, to hide, you know, because all of us have that, that was the
person who I confided in; you know what I’m saying? Not that it was right, but
that was the person who I could talk to, good and bad. To have that taken away
from you, it’s going to take some time to heal. I look at it like some of the
people, the newer people that I’ve met in this city, they’ve been a blessing.
They helped me get over that. That’s all I can say. Just from their words and
inspiration. Even if I’m on Twitter, I get people that say all the time,
“Dude, we miss you, what you doing, man? Come on, man. Get it right.” I see
people all the time that send their condolences, that send their prayers, so
I’m like, “You know what? It would be wrong for me to walk away from this city
just because [of] one person, or one bad seed.” The problem is this, pretty much
everybody in this city knows somebody in their family that died some kind of
way violently in this city. If nobody don’t speak up or nobody don’t do
something, that cycle going to keep on going. And to a certain degree I kind of
feel like I am the voice for the young generation, because I think I could be
heard a little bit more than they can. A lot of times to diffuse a situation
is just somebody opening their mouth, saying something. A lot of people are
scared to do that. I feel like it’s times where I’ve been in situations in
this city where it’s just, that’s all I have to do is say, “Come on, man.
Dude, that ain’t us. We ain’t got to do that.” And it goes away. So, it’s good and
bad. As long as your good outweigh your bad, I feel like, “Hey, you’re a
decent person to me.”
Jeff Mao 
Sort of on that note, you’ve also said, as far as reassessing your priorities,
that you are, quote, “Too old for bling now.”
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah. [laughs] Hey, if that’s your thing, do it. But I feel like at this point in my life,
there’s a lot of things I’m kind of… Mature. [laughs] I’m too old for that,
dude. On top of that, I guess, like I said, if it’s you, go do it, so be it,
but I don’t think I want to be somebody in a club where somebody’s like,
“What’s wrong with that old man? Why the fu-- you got on 12 chains and
three earrings?” [laughs]
Jeff Mao 
Now, you obviously still produce and you have your label, Chubby Boy.
Mannie Fresh 
Yes, sir.
Jeff Mao 
Working with new acts and maintaining that obviously and working with other
groups and established acts as well, but you also, I guess, did you ever stop
DJing?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah, I did stop DJing but even more so now, I’m DJing more than I’m doing
beats. I’ve been DJing, man, that’s all I can say is, it’s been a warm
welcome. I’ve been everywhere. The crazy thing is, like I said, if I go
somewhere, they’re like, “Hey, we want you back two or three more times.” I
always say this, DJing is helping me understand what’s going on in music right
now, because I was kind of off the scene in my own little world for a second
or whatever, so to get back into clubs and DJ or whatever, I feel like I’m
falling in love with hip-hop all over again.
Jeff Mao 
I know you played in New York about a month ago.
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah.
Jeff Mao 
I wasn’t at the gig, but I heard from a lot of people that there was a lot of
excitement around that gig, a lot of excitement.
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah, man, the crazy thing is, it went down. I would say that was my second
time actually meeting Drake, and for him to come out and MC, I was just like,
“Wow, this has got to be something big.” When he first got to the gig, he was
kind of like, “Dude, I grew up on you. I love your music, da-da-dah,” and he
was just chilling behind me. He was, “Man, it’s killing me.” I’m like, “Here,
man, take the mic.” [laughs] Even to meet some people, I’m still a fan. Some
cats will play that cool role and be like, “Man, it’s all about me.” If I like
you, I like you. I’m a fan. Even with him I was, “Dude, I’m a fan of your
music. I love everything that you’re doing. Keep up the good work.” I’m
sitting there telling him stuff that fans I guess like do or whatever. I’m
like, “Man, number 13, go hard.” He’s like, “Man, what’s number 13?”
Jeff Mao 
I do want to make sure that folks get a chance to ask a couple questions. I’m
sure that people have things they want to ask Mannie, so I’m going to open it
up at this point.
Audience Member 
Who is Mantronix?
Mannie Fresh 
[laughs] Mantronix was actually a producer from New York, and if you download some of
his music, I promise you, you’ll hear a lot of elements from Mannie Fresh.
Well, I kind of like took some of the things that he did, like he’s telling me
some of the songs, “Fresh Is The Word,” um, “Bassline,” but he was way ahead of
his time. This dude was way, way ahead of his time. But he was from New York.
He was one of the dudes who first did snare rolls, triplets with the hi-hats
and all that kind of stuff, but he was big in New Orleans. I don’t know if
nobody else got it, but we loved everything that Mantronix did.
Audience Member 
A lot of people are familiar with undercutting DJs and stuff like that. I
didn’t know nowadays that recording budgets and stuff have been cut with major
labels. Do you deal with that at all? There’s all these young kids producing
off Fruity Loops and stuff where they can get something for free from somebody
else instead of paying, you know?
Mannie Fresh 
Well, dude, I’m glad. I wouldn’t have thought of what you just said, but I’m so glad that
you asked that question that you asked, because, honestly, what’s going on is
you got like a lot of young producers right now, and DJs, but I’ll start out
with the producers that’s doing beats, that’s real talented kids, that the
beats are incredibly hot, but… They killed the game. That’s all I can say. They
killed the game by giving away music, giving these little cheap prices. You
know what I’m saying? If you’re thinking that’s getting you on, that’s not
getting you on, because basically what labels are doing, when they finished
with you, they moving on to the next kid that’s doing that. I mean, there’s no
loyalty in this. It never was with a label. Pretty much to say, “I’m going to
sell a beat for $500,” or whatever it is that you’re doing, art that took time
to perfect, somebody who I guess worked on their craft the same way you worked
on it and you’re giving it away for that? That’s nuts to me. To undercut
somebody is either they want it or they don’t want it. Good music is going to
stand up on its own. I don’t really feel like you have to say, “Well, if he’s
charging three, I’ll charge two.” That’s crazy. Either they want it or they
don’t want it. You’ve got to look at it, at the height of this, and this
wasn’t too long ago, I would say probably three or four years ago, you had
producers that were getting like 70 to 100 grand for a song, and now it’s
trickled down to $500. How does that happen? That’s amazing. Basically, I know
some hot producers, I won’t say no names, but what they charge for beats is
crazy. It’s like, “Dude, y’all pretty much killed the game.” The thing of it
is right now they going, “Well, who can I shop my beats to?” I’m like, “Well,
the labels done with you. They’ve moved on to the next person that they did
the same thing to you.” They pretty much was like, “OK, we’ll get some beats from
you right now because you hot. On the way out, we going to meet somebody else
and tell him the same thing.” And you got to think about it. This is some real
game I’m going to give you right now. Why would you give T.I. a beat? T.I. has
money, you know what I’m saying? You don’t have to do no favors for him. You
don’t have to do no favors for Lil Wayne, none of that. It’s not a good look.
Like, if a label tells you, “Oh, it’s a good look to do this song because it’s Lil
Wayne.” You’re like, “Fu--, Lil Wayne can afford this.” That’s not a good
look. It’s more so, “Y’all can pay me for this. This is a major artist. I’m
not going to give him nothing.” I’d rather not even do it, because it’s the
guys who fall for that that’s messing up the game. Because truthfully, you
have people that can afford, like he could have came out of his pocket and paid you
probably more than what the label would have paid you, but I refuse to let
somebody tell me, “It’s a good look or it’s gone,” I guess further my career
to give away something to somebody that’s already established. He can pay for
this. He’s already established. If y’all want it, y’all will pay for it, but
if you give it away, you’ve got to think about everything that’s going on
right now as a producer, as a DJ or whatever. A lot of people are not getting
the credit that they deserve. If you did a song that somebody tell you is a
good look but your name going to get on the next one, that’s bullsh--. [laughs]
Audience Member 
You mentioned earlier that you work with Steve Hurley. Now, with the progression of
hip-hop, now it’s becoming a lot with house music; do you see yourself
following some of that transition?
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah. A lot of my gigs are more so pop gigs right now. I’ve been doing a lot
of clubs that’s pop, and I kind of feel like truthfully, pop is going places
that hip-hop is scared to go right now. They have more to talk about,
basically. Hip-hop is one-dimensional right now. It’s more so of, “We’re going
to make a song about how rich we are,” sh--. This is like, “All right, damn,
somebody done that. We can’t keep doing that.” But, you know, you have
different elements of pop music that’s going on right now, so I’m open to
everything. I don’t know. If polka jump off right now, I’m in there.
[laughs]
Jeff Mao 
Stay away from polka. They eliminated it from the Grammies, we’ve heard
earlier. When you DJ the gigs, do you bring your machines, do it the same old
way from back in the day?
Mannie Fresh 
Yes, sir.
Audience member 
First of all, I’ve got to say I remember Mantronix. All day. When I heard that
I kind of jumped, [looks around] “Who knows Mantronix?” One thing I wanted to ask and you
mentioned a lot of the young cats coming up, potentially killing the game,
whatnot, but yes, they are still talented. Three or five names, I don’t know,
that you feel, some young producers coming up, that you’re personally feeling
whether we’ve heard of them or not.
Mannie Fresh 
I would say Drama. He does a lot of stuff out of Atlanta. Shawty Redd as well, he does a lot of stuff out of Atlanta. It’s some people who, I mean, I don’t think
get credit like they should get. You’ve got this guy, T-Mix, he did all the
8Ball & MJG stuff. He did some of Lil Wayne’s stuff when I left Cash Money.
It’s a lot of tight producers that own the dudes out of Houston right now,
Beanz N Kornbread. You’ve got a lot of them that’s tight. You got to look at
it too, what hip-hop, where it’s going at. If a group right now, like let’s
just say it was five people or whatever, walked in here right now, you
probably wouldn’t know none of them because it’s not marketed like that no
more. Like, even producers, it’s more so if… The people who I name right now,
if they were sitting on a sofa with me, you wouldn’t know them, because it’s
almost like that’s the way record companies want it to be. They don’t want you
to get too far, where you can start naming your price and doing certain
things and whatever. I just think it’s a lot of producers I know, just cats
that I meet that might play me some beats, and I’m like, “Wow, dude, you got
something that’s going on.” The people who stand out some kind of way, you
figured out a way to market yourself, you figured out a way to get yourself in
front [of] people to know you and what you’re selling. It’s almost like you’ve got
to sell an image as well as a beat. I’ve hung out with, like you saying, some guys, the younger
guys that’s supposed to be at the height of their game and we might go to a
basketball game and somebody’s, “You’ll take a picture with me?” I’m like,
“Take a picture with him too.” You know what I’m saying? Because I don’t want
him to feel like, “Who’s that?” I’m like, “It’s the dude who did such-and-
such, he did Waka Flocka [Flame].” They’re like, “Who is that?” You know what I’m
saying? [laughs]
Audience Member 
Could you talk a little bit about your transition of your sound and how it
evolved from the Gregory D era to the bounce era to the Cash Money era and
then I guess ‘till now. Also, you’re sort of responsible for getting me
interested in rap in general.
Mannie Fresh 
[laughs] I really wouldn’t call it transition. I guess some people say that or
whatever. It’s more of I kind of go with what’s going on. I don’t really say
it’s a transition or nothing like that. There’s more of, “OK, this is what I
think it should sound like, this is what it is.” ‘Cause truly, I haven’t
changed my drum kits in, sh--, a decade, you know what I’m saying? But they
still work. There’s some things that, if it’s not broke, don’t mess with it. I see
elements of me in a lot of songs or whatever. I look at it like this. I came
from, I guess, the generation of when you knew a producer. You don’t know that
now. I hear songs right now that are so scary, where it’s, “I thought I did
that.” You’ll hear sh-- like, “Damn, that sounds like I did it.” You’ve got to
check yourself, where you’re like, “Damn, that’s my hi-hats, that’s my snare
rolls,” and there’s no thank you attached to it! [laughs] It’s more so of, I guess
where I’m at right now, I’m not saying that I’m changing, but I what kind of
makes me not want to do the same song is, I keep hearing the same song. Even
though I know it’s what I do, it’s to the point where it’s like, “I don’t really
want to do that. I want to try something else.” You know what I’m saying? It’s
like hearing your hi-hats, hearing your snare rolls or whatever, even though
you know that’s your thing, if you hear 18 songs like that, I’ll try something
else.
Audience Member 
Touching on what he [points to other audience member] said before about the younger producers, now that most
people are doing digital downloads and not buying CDs, not really reading
album credits, how do you see that affecting younger producers that are
getting on bigger tracks being able to grow their career without people really
knowing who they are, like back in the day, or even producers doing entire
albums for artists like they used to do?
Mannie Fresh 
I just think that as a producer you’ve just got to work twice as hard. You’ve
got to figure out a way to market yourself, you know? The game change, it’s
the gift and the curse. The Internet is the gift and a curse. To a certain
degree, alright, you’re losing by downloads, but at the same time, you’re winning
because you can reach the whole world on the Internet. As a producer, you have
to figure out a way like, how can I stay in touch with people? If you’ve got to sit
there and, I don’t know, tweet messages all day or whatever you got to do to
get people to know you, you have to do that. You just have to work twice as
hard. You used to, when you made a big hit, it was a big deal, the producer that was
attached to that song. That’s not a big deal no more. People are just like,
“Well, nobody don’t really care about you. We just want a hot track or
whatever.” I think you got to brand yourself. If it was a hot song, there’s no
way in the world you’re not going to let me do an intro on it. I’m going to
kick, scream and holler. If you’re saying, “I’m doing this song for Michael
Jackson and y’all not going to let me put a Figgie Fresh in there, sh--, it
ain’t going down.”
Audience Member 
So currently, who are you a fan of, unsigned or maybe a legend now? Who are you
listening to?
Mannie Fresh 
I’m kind of old-school, dude. I’m not really even listening to music right
now. I’m not even going to lie to you. I’m a DJ, and I got to play songs, but
honestly, I’m not really feeling kind of what’s going on right now. I could
give you my reasons for it. At one time hip-hop was, you know, it was a
teacher. You had Public Enemy that brung you pro-black music, you know what
I’m saying? You had N.W.A., that was your gangster music. You had Slick
Rick, that was a
storyteller. You had Cash Money, that was your blinged-out, whatever. You had
different elements of hip-hop. You had Nas, that was the deep dude that taught
you certain things or whatever. Now it’s just so one-dimensional, so it’s
almost like you hear the same song. It’s like, “OK, I’ve heard that before.”
The next song I play is the same song. So it’s really like I’m just being honest with you. I’m not really feeling music right now. I pretty much, when it comes down to what I listen to, I listen to old-school rap. When
I’m by myself or whatever, I’m listening to some old-school rap. That’s what’s
going on with me.
Jeff Mao 
I heard you also say, make an observation from doing some of the gigs, how a
lot of kids surprise you, which kids come up and recognize the old school
classics as opposed to the audience that you were hoping, maybe…
Mannie Fresh 
Yeah. I could give you examples. I’ve done gigs where I’ve DJd and it’s, I
don’t know, Buzzard Nuts, Arkansas, somewhere, and I’m just like, “All right,
y’all not going to know none of these songs. I don’t even know how I got the
gig or whatever.” They telling me sh--, like, “Dude, play this, a B-side song or
whatever.” I’m just like, “Damn! Really?” You know? It’s shocking. You can’t
look in the crowd and know what somebody is going to like. You just can’t. Like I said, it’s been places where I was just totally shocked, whatever, where they was like, “Hey, we want you to do a Mannie Fresh old-school set.” I’m like, “Well, what’s a Mannie Fresh old school set?” They’re
like, “Bounce music.” Like I said, this is Buzzard Nuts, Arkansas. Bounce
music? And they know all the songs! I’m like, “Wow, this sh-- is crazy.” I mean,
it’s shocking to me, the people who… Even in New York, when I did the New York thing, they was
just like, “We kind of want you to do your music, do your set.” So even when I
did my set and I’m like, “Yeah, I’ve been to New York before,” did shows or
whatever, but I’m like, “OK, this is going to be some down-south sh-- that
only we would know.” The crazy thing is I play underground sh-- and they knew
all the words to it. It was just like, “Don’t even go nowhere else, stay down-
south.” It was amazing to me, because I’m like, “Wow, I’m in New York. This is
hip-hop, where it started from.” The crowd is like, “Don’t go nowhere else,
stay down-south.” I was like, wow. That was crazy to me.
Jeff Mao 
Alright, I got one last question for Mannie Fresh, then we’ll wrap it up. Mannie… The
Asians want to claim you, man. Who’s Asian in your family? Who’s Asian in your
family? Come on.
Mannie Fresh 
[laughs] I’m with y’all. Somewhere down the line, I got a couple of Asians
in my family.
Jeff Mao 
All right. That’s what I wanted to hear. Ladies and gentlemen, Mannie Fresh. [stands]
[applause]
Mannie Fresh 
[stands] Thank y’all, thank y’all, thank y’all, thank y’all.
