Mario Caldato Jr. is a producer and studio engineer best known for wiling away many a long hour (or week, or month, or year) with the Beastie Boys. Born in Brazil, he developed his recording techniques with the variety of early ’80s acts and attitudes that made up Delicious Vinyl before going on to work with some of the biggest names in the business. 
Get set for a rip-roaring collection of music industry excesses, strong alliances, classic tracks and tales from the control room in his  lecture at the 2008 Red Bull Music Academy.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
We are very fortunate to have a gentleman, a producer, who has done quite a
bit of work with everybody from Beck to
John Lee Hooker to a host of
Brazilian artists as well. He has come all the way from Rio to be here and
speak with us today, so please join me in welcoming Mario Caldato Jr.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Thank you, thank you, glad to be invited to the Red Bull Academy here, it is
really incredible.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
You’ve been having a good time these last few days or so, checking on things?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
It’s incredible to see the gathering of people from all over the world and be
able to participate together. Share the knowledge that everybody has. Take it
on to the next generations, it is a really wonderful thing for everyone.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
I neglected to mention one group you have actually done quite a bit of work
with, but maybe you can just play something from that group and give everybody
an idea what Mario is known for?
(music: Beastie Boys – “So What’cha Want” / applause)
OK, so for those that may be unaware, that was a group called the Beastie Boys
and before the Beastie Boys you did quite a lot of other stuff. There seems to
be a routine with a lot of these lectures, let’s go back a little way and
find out how it started with what you do. So Mario, how did it begin for you?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Probably when my dad took me to Sears buying stuff and whatnot and he decided
to purchase an electric organ, a
Silvertone. Sears is a classic “find-
everything-in-one-spot” kind of place. He’s actually a mechanic, buys tools and my
mom buys clothes and vacuum cleaners and whatnot, and he decided one day to
get something cool. He asked me if I liked it and we went and checked them
out and they were on display. In the ‘60s, it was kind of a cool home
entertainment piece. They had these presets and it was just funky, just cool.
This guy would be playing it in the store so you get a demo as you’re walking
by, and if you purchase it, you get free lessons. So I got a few lessons and
they put a little chart with numbers and I played the chart with the numbers
and that was the beginning of my musical introduction.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
And beyond that Sears organ, what was the next step?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
It escalated. A few years later my parents moved to a house and they decided
they wanted to buy a piano, so I got a piano at the house and they put me in
some lessons. I took some classical lessons, did that for a few years and it
was fun and interesting for a bit and then it got a little serious. I had a
really strict teacher.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
How strict?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The worst part was that I had my lessons before I went to school. So school
started at eight in the morning and my lesson was at seven, which meant I had to get
up at 6:15 or something and leave the house at 6.30.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
That’s like downright abusive.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
It was kind of cruel, but it was the only time available and my dad told me she was a really
expensive and really good teacher. So I was told, “You are lucky to have this
and you should appreciate it,” and whatever. I did for a while when it got to
the point I wasn’t having fun so I stopped practicing. I would rather play and
do stuff like that than have my lesson. In the end I had my lesson and I was
supposed to play something and I didn’t play it and my teacher slapped me in
the face. Back and in the ‘60s you could do that. [laughs] She said, “You’re
not practicing, you’re wasting your parents’ money,” and all of that. My mom
was breaking down, “We’re giving you this money and you should really be
practicing,” and then I decided to quit. It wasn’t for me. I thought I’d
rather not play and so I backed out of the classical music. But I still had
the organ at the house and I enjoyed messing around with that, turning it on and playing it. The same one, Sears organ.
Back then, things were built to last, those things still work.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
What about the teacher, has the statute of limitations run out? Can we go back
and prosecute?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
I think she has probably gone by now, but I can’t be mad because I did learn
how to read and do some basic things, which were important later on in life. I
appreciated it definitely, but at the time I wasn’t interested so much in the
classical music. I was listening to the radio, and radio in the ‘60s, AM
radio, was playing really, really good and high-quality music. The pop music
was really high quality, the Beatles and the Stones, everything else was going
on, Motown, wonderful music that was happening, I would be listening to it all
the time.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
This is in Los Angeles?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
That’s correct. I was born in Brazil, São Paulo. My folks moved when I was two
years old to LA, not knowing how to speak the language or anything. They
took a big chance, and I got thrown into the whole American system of
schooling and all that. But I was exposed to all this music, which was
obviously around and really, really good. That was a big influence listening
to AM radio, there were only a few stations back then and everybody was
listening to the same things and it was really cool. I was fortunate to catch
that time, I think it was very inspirational.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So just absorbing all the music you were listening to and having some lessons,
some keyboard lessons, when did you make the transformation to create your own
music?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Well, it started off a few years later when I was about 12 or 13. My neighborhood
where I lived was a pretty mixed neighborhood but it changed quite a bit
after the LA riots. Most of the
white people, and there was lots of Asian people, actually, they had moved
away after the riots, so we had more black people moving in and Latinos and
stuff. That changed the neighborhood.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Which riots are you referring to?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The LA riots in ‘68, not the ‘92
ones.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao
Not the sequel.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The original ones. That was pretty serious back then, actually.
Obviously, in the ’60s all of the protests and things like that going on,
Martin Luther King and whatnot, it was an interesting time to be raised in
LA and the music definitely reflected it. My neighbors, I had several
friends and would hang out at their house and we would be listening to their
folks music, a lot of Al Green and Motown. My best friend was this black guy
Dwayne Allen, whose mom was a schoolteacher and she was really hip and she let
her son play music at home and whatnot, and for some reason he was really into
the Beatles. He went to Sears and his mom got him a guitar and we started
jamming along with the Beatles and doing covers. We started a little band
called the Soul Sticks, he played guitar and I played percussion, maracas and
tambourine and backing vocals and that is kind of where it started, hanging
out. Then it escalated to a drummer, this kid Calvin, who was really funky and
he had an older brother who was a jazz musician, who happened to have a
Ludwig drum kit, Beatles style.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao
That wasn’t from Sears, though.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
That
wasn’t from Sears, it was a real Ludwig. Now we had drums and it just all
slowly started, just jamming around and doing covers and playing for our
parents at little events on the weekend. That went on for a bit and when it
escalated, I switched schools from the one I was going to, from a public
school to a Catholic school, and started hanging out in Gardena and then I got introduced to a whole new crew of
friends. Same thing, I hooked up with some friends who had a little band and
they had a bunch of guitar players and a bass player and a drummer, but they
didn’t have anyone with a keyboard. I told them I had an organ, an electric
organ, and they were like, “Whoa, shit. You’ve gotta join the band.” So they had me come
down and they started showing me the playlist. Back then we were into Deep
Purple, Free and Led Zeppelin and started getting into a whole ’nother rock and
stuff and it just escalated from that band. We played at the school festivals
and then in the following year we went to junior high school and it escalated
to where we started another band and we just kept playing.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
When did you meet Mark
Nishita?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
In high school. He was actually in the second formation of my high school
band. He was in the phase two part, he came in as a keyboardist and a singer.
I was playing keyboards, I started off on the organ and eventually bought an
electric piano and a synthesizer. I was really fascinated when I went to the
music store and I saw these mid-’70s electric synthesizers, portable ones, they had all these knobs, making all of these crazy sound effects and stuff and that really
caught my interest. I was more into the sound effects and things and less into
the playing and so I ventured off into making sound effects and things.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
OK, so that’s when you became more interested in that aspect of it. You
mentioned Mark, who went on to become known as Money
Mark, who
played on all of the Beastie Boys records that you produced. Describe then
going from the early beginnings of recording and how you got into that aspect
of it and what followed.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Mark was definitely my main guy for getting me into recording. He wrote songs,
original songs. We had cover songs in the band, but he actually had original
songs. He was into acting and whatnot, and he did a play where he actually made his own
music for the play and to do that he went and bought himself a four-track, a reel-
to-reel Teac, which
was a really amazing machine. He figured it out himself, how to use it and
record, and he was doing that at home. He lived in a little house with two
other brothers and he didn’t really have a lot of room, so they had to set it
up in the living room and tear it down afterwards. I had just moved out of my
parents’ house and was on my own. I had this little job and I quit school and
had moved into a little back house and he said, “Hey, can I set up my gear
here?” And I was like, “Yeah, of course,” and he basically brought over his four-track
and we set it up in my little back house. We were hanging out, him playing
songs and you know, you hit record and watch the needle and keep it close
to zero. And I started engineering basically his sessions and that is really
where the recording started. Through his guidance and his will to just figure
things out himself and do it, he didn’t take any classes or anything and he
was very talented. We did that for a few years, four-track demos.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Then you started doing engineering things a little bit on your own. You
said you were DJing as well?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The recording stuff escalated. I slowly started buying gear, find a reverb
here… Actually, Mark, he would show up with stuff all the time in the studio. He would hear about stuff or run across it and one day he came in with a little
mixer that had reverb on it and an EQ and we thought, “Wow, this is
interesting.” Obviously, we’re hanging out just a lot of time just messing
around, taking a channel and panning it and adding reverb and just really
educating myself and finding out about it, and then plugging in an effect like
a phaser and making a bunch
of recordings. We made some mixes, we made some acetates we sent to the radio
station at the time. The college radio station was a big step, so we did that and
it got to the point where he played all the instruments and you couldn’t
really perform so he decided to start a band. By now, it was early ‘80s, ‘80,
‘81, something like that. He said, “Well, let’s start a band. You play bass.”
OK that was an easy thing for me to do. I got into that, and he made his brother
play drums. His brother was a punk rocker, he said, “You play drums,” and he
made him play drums and we got this other cat to play guitar, our friend
Bill from one of the old bands that we had. Then Mark started playing
keyboards and singing and we created the Jungle Bugs. And we were more
serious about that.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
That was the first time you really took it seriously and it wasn’t just
messing around?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Exactly. My first production was a 7" of the Jungle Bugs, which was a big deal.
We all had bands, but none of us had a record, and we decided to go ahead and
do it. I had a job, so I had some money so I put that in to fund the recording
and we were fortunate enough to make a little record and have fun with it.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So what was the style of music you were doing?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The ‘80s ska was really big, like the Specials, Elvis Costello, the
Clash and we were kind
of into a psychedelic ska, reggae vibe with a little bit of pop. Mark was very
Elton John and Billy Joel background, keyboards and all.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Was that like Fishbone back then as well?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
They were around that time, that was definitely happening. But we were
definitely weird, just different.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So how long did you do that for before you got into the next phase?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
That was a year or two of horsing around and playing and we worked our way
from little house parties and whatnot to play in Hollywood. We played at a club in
Hollywood and that was a big deal, we were like, “Oh, we made it,” although we
had to pay to play. We got a friend to sell tickets, but we played at a club
and thought, “Wow, now what do we do?” We had our little 7" and things kind of
went their own way and we kind of got bored with the music that we were doing
at the time. Then I started just being a music listener and going out and
absorbing live music a lot and hanging out at clubs and really getting into
the scenes, different scenes. I really got into reggae music when Bob Marley
died. I’d be listening to the public radio stations and they had a lot of
reggae programs and they were playing all this reggae music and I thought,
“Oh, what is this? This is really cool stuff.” I really found a connection, a calling there, and
I started listening to it a lot, got deep into it. I even took a trip to
Jamaica in ‘83 to go to the
Sunsplash and then I couldn’t
get any of my friends or anybody to go. I was like, “Does anybody want to come
with me?” And everyone was like, “What you’re listening to that for?” No one
was into it and I said, “No, I’m really into this music and it’s great and I’m
going to go.” And I went and had fun with a bunch of people and met some
people, bought some 7"s, some records.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So that was your pilgrimage to pay homage to Jamaican music?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The music was just a big motivation at that time for me. An inspiration, I should say.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Was it Jamaican music that styled or influenced what you did later, do you
think as far as a sound or sonic landscape?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Definitely. I didn’t really know much about it. I went to a record store once I
started listening to it on the radio to find out about it. I went
to my local record store on Cranshaw in the ’hood, where I lived. The
reggae section was literally like ten records or something. It wasn’t a lot.
And one of the first records I found was Lee
Perry. “Who is this guy here with the trench coat in the woods, with a
suitcase? This looks crazy.” I looked at the back and there was all these
crazy titles, “Acid Test” and whatnot, and I was like, “I’ve got to get
this record,” and I bought that and I think one other record by
LKJ, but I
took those records home and played them and was totally amazed at how crazy
and how different this stuff was. This is deep, you know.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
At that point, is this when you began your DJing portion?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The band stuff died down and I ended up owning most of the equipment from the
band. Everybody would go broke and the guitar player, he would sell me his amp and
Mark would sell me the microphones and I ended up owning the PA and building a
PA. So I had a PA system and I started renting it out on the weekends, little
parties just from cassette tapes and turntables and it just escalated. I was
amazed, there was always someone calling up for something and I did a lot of
music researching, listening and learning.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So you had a little PA rental business going?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
And eventually, I ended up collecting records and thought, Well, I might as
well play music while people are waiting for the bands to come on. I DJed
before, using mix tapes or with records if I had the turntables on hand and I
got to meet a lot of cool people. I did sound for a few clubs…
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
OK, there is one club night that might have been a very profound experience
for you. Do you want to describe when that happened and how that connected
with all the other things that you wind up doing?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
There was one spot, a club that we frequented regularly called Power Tools,
which had a very arty New York vibe. A club with go-go dancers and live
musicians playing and weird art installations and people dressed up very
dramatic and stuff and it was at a very interesting place. We had all kinds of
celebrities coming down. This was ‘86. The club started in ‘85, but I
discovered it in almost ‘86, and I was just hanging out there every weekend
and the DJ was really incredible because he would play all genres and keep the
dancefloor moving. He had a musical knowledge and he knew how to mix stuff
from everything. Dance stuff, soul stuff, funk stuff, rock stuff, and make it
all work. He’d play even Sergio Mendes, Brazilian or Latin boogaloo stuff,
which no one was really playing and making it work like he was doing it. He
was friends with Andy Warhol and Basquiat and all these people would hang out
at his club and it was a really cool scene and he was very influential on a
lot of people who went there to hear his music and hang out.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Where was this in LA, what was the venue?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
This was at the Park Plaza hotel across from MacArthur Park, which is a really
interesting area of downtown. The building itself had a staircase with two
ballrooms on each side, one on one side, one on the other, sometimes we used
both, and it was really incredible. At one time it was actually a Masonic
temple with all these crazy figures on the walls. It was just the perfect
atmosphere for a groovy club like that and I happened to be there one night in
particular where there was a vibe that something was going on, these rappers
were in town and were going to do something. Nobody knew, they were just
walking around and next thing you know, the DJ, he didn’t really talk, he
would just play music, but the music stops and these three rappers get up on
stage and it was the Beastie Boys. They didn’t have a record out, they just
had a single out, “Hold It Now, Hit
It” or something, and they were
in town, and the DJ was friends with them or had invited them up to do
something and they got up on stage and said, “We’re going to do a song.” And
people were like, “Wow, OK, this is cool,” and they grabbed the mics, and
tested the mics, and the DJs up there, DJ
Hurricane, testing out the
turntables, and they’re getting ready to drop the first record. He’s like
[makes scratching noise] and there’s the intro to the song and the roll, and
the first 808 that comes
on, boom, it just shuts down the whole PA and the guy’s like... [muffled voice] “Hello? Hello?”
The whole show gets sabotaged, literally. They didn’t have a sufficient
soundsystem and all this excitement, it was like, “What a bummer!” And
everybody was let down because they were really getting excited, like, “This
is going to be cool,” and they were let down and I was really bummed out about
it. So I was like, “OK, who is the owner here? I’ll go and talk to the guy.” I
went to a security guard and said, “Who’s the owner?” And he said, “That guy
over there.” I went over there and I spoke to the guy and said, “You need a
sound man,” and he said, “Tell me about it, I know.” He goes, “What do you
do?” I said, “I’m a soundman,” and I told him about it and he said, “Great,
can you come down next week?” So I said yes, ended up coming down the
following week and had a look at their equipment.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
What did they have?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Or what they didn’t have. They had a little home stereo, a Marantz 50w amp powering four Cerwin Vegas in a club with like a thousand
people and it’s like, you can’t really do that. They were just barely making it,
and obviously with the band, where the dynamics are so loud, it just shut the
amp off. And I thought you need some power amps. So I showed up the following
week with some power amps and some crossovers and then got some sub woofers for
them. I got to meet the DJ, whose name was Matt
Dike, he was the head guy
there who really is responsible for a lot of things.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
What was his reaction when you showed up?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
He was thrilled. He was very embarrassed about the situation, about what had
happened with the soundsystem. He was cursing out the guy who had set it up,
but it wasn’t his fault. They were just under-equipped. And he was happy the
next week when he heard the soundsystem and everybody was like, “Wow, what did
you do? It’s amazing!” But I really brought it up to the next level of sound.
I had raised the speakers and taken them off the ground, you have to get
speakers up because everyone was dancing and it cuts off all the high
frequencies. I brought in some subwoofers, which was great because the go-go
dancers could dance on the subwoofers and they really loved it because they
were on top and everyone could check them out and they had bass on their feet
rattling.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
A multiple use, really.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
It escalated and from then on it went cool and my association with Matt
started and I would hang out with him in the DJ booth, which was a privilege
because nobody really got to hang out there. He had all his records there and
he was very particular of what was happening. Fab Five
Freddy was a good friend and these
guys would sleep at his house, Warhol and Basquiat and Fab Five Freddy,
because he is actually from New York originally. After a while, he was getting
a little tired of the DJ thing, he’d been doing it for years. He could move
the crowd and knew what records work and what breaks, he was really into the
breaks. Obviously, rap music was really developing and there was a lot of
sampling going on and he started to understand what was going on. He was like,
“Man, I gotta to do this. I really want to be a producer and make some
records and I can do it,” you know? And he made an attempt to record
his friend Kevin Dolan playing drums, have him play “Funky
Drummer” for like ten minutes on
this four-track cassette, just so that he can have a long break. One night he
brought the four-track to the club and said, “Can we hook this up to the mixer so
we can play it?” And I said, “Yeah, of course.” I rigged it for him and EQed it
a bit and gave it a little quick mix because he didn’t really have it mixed
right and then we cued it up. When the time was right we started it and played
it and he had the crowd moving, and nobody noticed that the record switched to
a cassette of the drummer, his friend playing drums. It was working, and he got
so happy he was like, “Wow, this is great! We’re making it.” I said, “Yeah. We could do
a lot more. I know how to record.” He was like, “Dude, I gotta do a record.” I was
like, “I already made a record, a 7".” He was like, “Man, really? I want to
start a label.” I was like, “OK,” and the next week he said, “I got a budget
of about five thousand dollars, what can we get?” He goes, “I need a sampler, I know what I
want to get.” At the time the
SP-12 was out, one of the first
sampling drum machines that all the hip-hop kids were using at the time. We
knew he wanted that and then I told him we could probably get an eight-track and
so we bought an eight-track Tascam 388, a mixer and recorder all in one, which was convenient and
practical for what we were using it for and it was within the budget. So we went and
got that and I set up the studio in his living room. I told him I had some
microphones and reverbs and delays and compressors and cabling and all that
stuff, and I hooked it up like a studio. He didn’t know what it was, he had a speaker here and a speaker
there and didn’t have the right cables. I laid it out and that was the
beginning of Delicious Vinyl,
his living room.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
But he had a partner also, is that correct?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
He did have a friend, Mike Ross, who was also a kind of DJ guy, who worked at
MCA, and was an assistant to an A&R guy. He would sit around and listen to
demo tapes all day and filter them out and give them to his boss. He would see
his boss and listen to stuff and he’d say, “This is crap.” There was a big
pile of stuff, he would go through the piles they didn’t use and would be
like, “Wow, this guy here…” They would have their name on what was back then a
cassette. They would write their name and phone number on it, their contacts,
and it was just right there, like Tone
Loc? Like, OK. Young
MC? Whoever their names were. “This
sounds pretty cool to me.” The guy had a deep voice, his demos were a cappella,
and the guys were like, “Maybe we can use these guys for something,” and he
showed them to Matt. And then Matt, within the first week he got a
drum machine, just locked himself away just pulling out all his break beats,
“Scorpio” and everything you can
imagine, he started looping up all the best parts that worked on the
dancefloor and started creating some grooves. He didn’t play, so his tools
were his turntables and his records and he would go and match the pitch and
figure stuff out and started mapping out songs every day, one or two songs.
After about a week or two, he had ten songs and it was like, “This is cool.” And his
friend showed up with the demo tapes, like, “Let’s try calling this guy up here and have
them maybe rap over one or two of these songs,” or something, and it basically
started off like that. Guys would show up and be like, “Hey, how about this
track?” We would play the track and would figure out a theme or something. One
of the first tracks we did with Loc was “Cheeba
Cheeba.” He liked to get his weed
on so that was an obvious first track for him to go off the dome, “Cheeba
Cheeba ya’ll,” and it went on from there.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Do you want to play something from then? You are engineering these records
while they are being recorded in Matt’s place, right?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
This is Delicious Vinyl in the living room and it is basically stuff that was
done on an SP-12 at the beginning. There was a closet that I turned into a
vocal booth when it started, like, “This is perfect right here.” Pull out
everything and carpet it up and set up a mic and that is all we had, a
vocal booth and the living room and Matt’s musical ideas. It was literally a factory of stuff and this is, I guess, one of the big songs.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
You want to play something from the Delicious Vinyl years?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
This is one that kinda set it off for everyone.
(music: Tone Loc – “Wild Thing”)
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Tone Loc, ”Wild Thing.” You were describing how that little track was put together?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Yeah, Matt was figuring out the drum machine and on that one there, he just took
some beats from Bizzy B I think it was, the kicks and snares, and he found a Van
Halen riff. He was really inspired by
the whole Rick Rubin rap/rock kind of thing and I think he was trying to do that, emulate that kind
of vibe. And he brought a West Coast vibe to it, the Van Halen thing, like nobody would do
something like that, but he just used the intro and the little guitar hits. He
actually came up with the concept of the theme “Wild Thing.” He came up with
the concept, like, “We got to come up with something that is catchy.” He’d
seen Spike Lee’s movie She’s Gotta Have It, and they say
the “wild thing” in there, and he’s like, “That’s the hook right there, we got to do
that.” And we asked Young MC, who was a good lyrical writer, he could write
rhymes, he actually wrote the rhymes for “Wild Thing” and we told him the
concept. He went and wrote all these rhymes, and Loc didn’t really write any
of the rhymes on that one, but he was the perfect voice for it. It was just
finding the right combination to put things together. I didn’t think much of it
after we did it. I thought this is all right, and I wasn’t thinking it was
that great. But when you put it all together and you see the video that is what
set it off, and the timing of it too. And it does work on the dancefloor, I’ve
got to say. I still hear it nowadays, even though I live in Brazil now, I
hear it in the favelas, they sample that roll and the intro and his voice and
it still rocks. Who would imagine we mixed it in a little living room on a
minimal set up in a closet?
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Did you want to play something else from the Delicious Vinyl years?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
We worked on a lot of stuff. I guess I’ll move to Young MC, who was another
cat who happened to fall into the same category. We called him up and had him
sing. This guy had lyrics. I had to go and pick him up from USC
to bring him to the studio in my car and whatnot and he was always prepared.
He had a book of rhymes but didn’t really have any music, which is good, and
Matt and I provided all the music. This right here is just a mix of a bunch of
stuff.
(music: Young MC – “Bust a
Move”)
Young MC won a Grammy for that record. I guess, it was probably the second
year that they had a rap category.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
These records were huge pop hits. I remember being in New York at the time, we
heard this sort of stuff and thought, “What the hell is this, man?” When you
were creating it and it was taking off, and I’m sure the perspective is quite
different in LA. I guess describe the feelings of seeing all this stuff take off. Was it like, this is great, this is exciting? Or were you thinking in terms of hip-hop
and different regions and perhaps backlash from people as well?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
At that moment, we had no idea what was happening because when I started
working at Delicious Vinyl we were working on a bunch of things at the same
time, a bunch of different artists. We never knew what was going to take off. Obviously Loc was one of those first guys and Young and it happened really quick, within
six months, eight months, there was already a movement. Then, as soon as the
video came out, that was literally overnight. They started playing it on MTV
and started getting requests. Then, a week later all the national radios
picked it up, and when the national radios pick it up, it just blows up. He wasn’t even charting and then, all of a sudden, he enters the top 200. And after I think about a month or two, I think it went to No. 1 for one week.
It knocked off Paula Abdul, who was real hot at the time, and we knocked her
off for one week and it happened really quick. We were really excited and we
didn’t know what to expect and we thought the music was cool and different.
Obviously, it wasn’t as hard as the Beastie Boys and Public Enemy and LL Cool J and stuff like that, but that wasn’t the intention. Matt was really into a
dance vibe with obviously rap being the medium, but the music was groovier and
funkier and it worked. It got respect from the East Coast, eventually, when
they started listening to it and it was pretty cool and it got some crossover,
which really brought it into the mainstream.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So do you want to get into the Dust Brothers?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
When we were making the records we were getting introduced to a lot of people.
Obviously, people started sending in demo tapes and whatnot, and we had, one of
the guys… They were promoting the stuff, sending it to radio stations, and they sent it to a college station, Claremont radio station, and two of these guys
E.Z. Mike and King Gizmo had a rap radio show and they were huge fans of Tone
Loc. Especially the very first single, the “Cheeba Cheeba” one that couldn’t be
played on regular radio because it was talking about weed. But they would play
it on their program. They had “The Dusted Hour” or something, and these guys
were very creative and they actually had their own demos and they passed that
on to the guy who was servicing them and bringing them records. This guy,
Orlando, he goes, “Here’s their demos, they sent it to you guys, you guys
should check them out,” and Matt heard the demo, we listened to it at the
studio and we were like, “Oh my God, these guys are on another level.” They
were really inspired by the Bomb
Squad and the whole Public Enemy
layers of samples and they had eight or ten samples going at the same time,
all synced up. Back then, we didn’t know how to do that, really. We were basically just
sampling on the fly and programming everything in a drum machine and hitting
play and starting it and letting it go. I already had the arrangement worked
out in the sequence. They had complex stuff playing, a bunch of things at the
same time, and we were like, “How can you do that?” We wanted to meet them. And their musical selection was really, really cool and we had the guys come down
to the studio and they explained to us, “This is how we do it. We use a
four-track cassette, we have a little box, a PPS-1 that lays
SMTPE on a track, it reads it
back so you can sync it up, you get a start tone…” We were like, “This is
crazy science.” We didn’t know about this stuff. And it really was because it
allowed you to go back, sync up to the same BPM at the same point. And then we
were like, “God, this is like a new invention.” Now you have endless
opportunities to go back and add stuff. And it was really science and the
broadest technology to us and we incorporated it and start using it in the
studio, and in return we let them use the studio to redo their songs and save
them bouncing everything down to three tracks because they only had a four-track
at their own studio. At this point we had upgraded the eight-track to the
16-track. I had made an investment and bought a 16-track so we had more tracks
to work with and they came and laid down 15 tracks of loops, everything
separate. We would listen to this and think, “This is incredible.” But we
didn’t know how to arrange it. So what we did, we would have continuous loops
and then we just did everything with the mutes, turning stuff on and off, that
was the old school way of arranging it. So we would just lay all these loops,
turn stuff on and off and make an arrangement and we made a couple of mixes
and the tracks turned out really, really cool. We didn’t know what to do with
them. None of the Delicious Vinyl rappers were really right for it.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Their vocals wouldn’t have sounded right on the Dust Brothers’ productions,
because there was too much going on in them?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
On those particular tracks. But what we ended up doing was asking them to
finish off the Loc record. We had like eight tracks ready and we thought we needed
a couple more, so we asked them to produce three tracks. They came up with
three tracks for Loc, because they had Loc in mind, and they ended up doing “Cutting
Rhythms” and “Next Episode” and another one I can’t
remember. So they produced three songs on that record, which was their
introduction into working with Delicious Vinyl. And then they did a couple for
Young MC, they did two songs, they did “Know How” with the Shaft thing. They are actually
standout songs on those records because of their production on it. They taught
us a lot and it was a really good collaboration.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
But it would become a situation where they wouldn’t just get an album track on
a Tone Loc or a Young MC album, but they got to do something pretty big
after that, wanna talk about taht?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The two tracks, the first two demo tracks they sent to us, the really hot ones
we didn’t know what to do with. Matt had the master plan. Well, he had heard
Beastie Boys had just got off their label, they were suing their manager, they
were suing their producer, they were leaving Def
Jam and going somewhere else.
And he was like, “We’ve got to do their record.” He wanted to do it and he needed help doing it, and so he
said, “We’ve got to do it, let’s send them these two songs.” So we get our
little contact, this skater kid Max Perlich, who was an actor and knew Ad-
Rock, something like that, he was
going to New York and we slipped him the tape. He went and got it to the guys
directly and they heard it, they heard these instrumental tracks and were
like, “What is this stuff?” They obviously loved Public Enemy, that was their label
mates, and they wanted to go to the next level and this was the next level to
them. “We want to come and meet you guys.” They planned to come out and they
came out to meet us at our studio at Delicious Vinyl.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Alright, so do you want to play one of the things that you guys wind up doing?
This is one of the instrumentals that were sent over?
(music: Beastie Boys – “Shake Your
Rump”)
Mario Caldato Jr. 
That’s a Dust Brothers production there.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So you are recording all this stuff?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
I am engineering at this point on that track, yeah.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
You guys are hearing this stuff and pretty much losing your minds, I imagine. 
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Everybody was just bugging,
like, “What in the heck is that?” There are so many things going on and it’s
madness, and that's what the Beasties were into. They liked the chaos of it
because it wasn’t predictable, it was funky and Latin beats and timbales and
crazy Moogs, the “Car Wash”
keyboard and
scratching and a lot of stuff put together.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
They ran into sample clearance issues on their first record. So what happened
with this one because these had more samples, even on this one record alone?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
This one here they went completely legit. They signed to Capitol and it was a
whole different thing. Obviously, they were popular, people were after them
and whatnot and they knew they had to cover their asses, so they cleared it and put all the
samples down and they literally spent between two, three-hundred thousand dollars just on sample
clearances, which is actually cheap because back then they were still
negotiating. People were like, “What? You want to give me five thousand dollars to use a
little bit of my record?” Nowadays people want a lot more. It was a lot, it
was huge. There were a few things they didn’t get cleared. They couldn’t find
the people they were just so obscure and hidden, it was impossible. People
still wonder about a couple things, but I’d say 95 percent, which is a lot, [was cleared].
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
You were saying there was one particular session that was particularly
amusing?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The whole process of recording Paul’s
Boutique was an amazing ride because we were
still getting over the Loc and Young MC high and we were getting all this
attention and whatnot. Then the Beastie Boys come into town and were obviously very excited about
the songs. They did the two songs first and then said, “We have to make a
record immediately. We’re going to New York and will be back in a month. Get a
studio, get the best studio, get everything you need.” They spared no
expenses. So we went to the top studio, the Record Plant, spend
three thousand dollars a day. Since there was no instruments, we just had a huge room where they recorded drums and whatnot, and we
rented a ping-pong table, a pool table, air hockey, pinball and just filled it
up with junk that wasn’t music. Just so we could hang out and have fun, and
that was the environment, was to have fun. And all they had to do was do vocals, and
the Dust Brothers provided all the music. It was like two teams, we would be
there in the daytime laying down the tracks, they would show up at night and
be like, “OK, we got some lyrics,” and they would divvy up their lyrics and
decide what to do and work on a quick arrangement and laid it down. But there
was a lot of hanging out and playing ping-pong and whatnot.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Who was the best ping-pong player in the Beastie Boys?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Actually, no one was really good. The best guy was E.Z. Mike, he was the Dust
Brothers. The Beastie Boys, they didn’t have no game. They thought they could play
basketball, too, but the West Coast guys took them out. We would take them
out. Matt Dike could shoot. Mike D couldn’t dribble,
it was pretty funny back then.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Why could I guess that Mike D couldn’t dribble?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
They got better. So it was a nine month process of hanging out in this big
expensive studio, ordering prime rib to go, crazy expensive dinners. We had a
dealer that made deliveries directly to the studio with ounces of weed, just
the most ridiculous things we could think of.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Capitol was like, “Yo, we got the Beastie Boys, they just sold millions and millions of
records, this is going to be amazing, a huge hit.”
Mario Caldato Jr. 
They thought they had it for sure because the Beasties sold four or five million. It
was the first, biggest rap record, so Capitol gave them a budget and signed
them for a few millions. They had everything they wanted and they abused it.
They totally took it to the limit, ordering the runner to go out and buy dumb
things, shopping, everything, shoes, whatnot. It was all about fun and how ridiculous
and extravagant we can be with the music and with our time and what we were
doing. It got to the point towards the end, and we were getting down to the
last song and we saved this one song for last, and they told us we had to move
to this other studio because they were going to remodel one room. So we were
in a Neve room and we went to this other
SSL room, just a whole
different vibe, and we thought, “Well, let’s do that to this crazy song,” and
we thought this would be a cool one to do there.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So this is the product of that environment?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
“Car Thief.”
(music: Beastie Boys – “Car Thief” / applause)
It was a night to remember.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
OK, so how long was that night?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
That night was just crazy and we couldn’t believe it. The next day we listened
to the track and were like, “Oh, I guess this is alright, it’s going to work.” We
were pretty faded. It was an experience, we were open, it was cool. Nobody got
addicted, nobody became a crackhead afterwards. It was a total experience.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So, you know, it’s totally cool to try it yourself, that’s the lesson we
learned. [laughter]
Mario Caldato Jr. 
As long as you’re in the studio, a safe environment. Just don’t stand on the
console.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
And do a bong hit before you try the crack. So you said that was nine months?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Nine months in the studio and then we finally had the baby. They had a big launch
on top of Capitol Records, on the roof, they had a release party and they even had
airplanes going by, write “Beastie Boys” in the sky. They took down the
Capitol flag and put up a Beastie Boys flag on top of the Capitol building.
That is how excited they were about it, and they had a New Orleans marching
band playing. Everything was just ridiculous, you couldn’t believe what was
going on. They really milked it and we had fun. It was an incredible moment.
And then the party kind of died a bit after the record came out. Well, two weeks
before the record came out, the Capitol president got fired and they moved the
whole staff and everybody. It was one of those big corporate moves and
everything changed, they didn’t know what to do, they didn’t want to work the
record. They did one single, “Hey Ladies,” and one video and it didn’t quite come off or have
the impact at the time. Everybody was expecting a...
Jeff “Chairman” Mao
Multi-million seller.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Well, expecting more
than the first record, Licensed To
Ill. It was only later that
people listened to the record and really appreciated it.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
I guess it was a big disappointment for the company then?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Yes, it was big. They told us it had gone gold and they gave us gold records, but
it only sold three hundred thousand or something at the time. They didn’t really work it and
the guys didn’t tour. They had another deal to do another record, that was
guaranteed, so after that moment we all took a little time off and then
we kinda decided, “Let’s do something completely different on the next record. No
samples.” That was the intent at first, let’s do something completely different. Our
friendship was really strong at the time, after working for so long. We hung
out a lot and I go over to their house and Ad-Rock was always into messing
around and jamming, and he had a drum kit. He liked to play beats in his
apartment, the neighbors loved him, but he would be playing drums at home. We would be hanging out and those guys started to get the itch to make music and whatnot. I was like, “Instead of going into the studio and spending all that
money, why don’t we just make a little space?” I love home studios, I have
always had a home studio and feel comfortable and I think that’s a good
environment to work in as opposed to being in an expensive studio. And the
guys were like, “Yeah, that’s a good idea, we should do that.” At first we
just did some more jamming and we got inspired. My friend Money Mark would
show up once in a while. He always travels with a portable keyboard and
guitar, whatever he had on hand, and Ad-Rock and he would jam a little bit.
Then Yauch, who used to play bass in a band, he got into his Bad
Brains punk bass, fuzz bass and whatnot, and he would bring an amp over. Then Mike D, actually Mike D was
also a drummer, a drummer in a band, and he worked his way back into drums and
Ad-Rock switched over to guitar, although he is a better drummer to me. He
took the guitar spot and we were just kind of like jamming in an apartment and
the next thing you know the neighbors are like, “Shut up!” And we’re like,
“Oh fuck, this is cool. You know what? Let’s just go to a rehearsal place.” They rented
out a little rehearsal spot where 10 bands go and rehearse and you can hear
everybody jamming and we rented out one of those little rooms for a week and
we just went in there and start just jamming. I said, “Well, let me just bring a
DAT player, just for the hell of it, and record what these guys are doing. No
big deal, no pressure, let’s just capture the moment.” Laid down two mics,
just put them on the ground, a little portable DAT off to the side, hit record
and nobody knows what’s going on. Those guys just started jamming, just having
fun. Mark was leader, the musical guy because he was the most proficient on
his instrument and he would start a little groove. “OK, play in this key here,
G or A or whatever,” and the guys were like “OK,” and would just try to
groove. There was no pressure or nothing.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
That is definitely reflected in the nature of the recording that followed. So
what happened with the studio, because you eventually got out of the rehearsal
space?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The rehearsal space served the purpose because it set the seed for a few songs
that ended up being on Check Your Head. There were a couple of grooves that turned out
pretty cool, like, “Whoa, this is kind of funky,” and for some reason a friend of
theirs, the son of Donovan Leitch, the
son of Donovan, the famous singer, had a club in Hollywood and said, “Would you guys come down and
jam at the club?” Asked the Beasties to come down and jam but not called the
Beasties, just come down and jam, and they were like, “Yeah, that would be
fun.” And this was the first time they would play together at this club and
they just showed up. Mike had a van, everybody just packed everything in just
like an old school band. Everybody just carried their equipment and they set up and they would
play instrumentals at the club and everyone was just ecstatic about it, the
vibe. “This is kind of cool,” you know? They got a little response from people
and thought, “Hey, we can do this.” So we really needed to find a space so we
can build a studio. And Mike D had just moved into this area with his
girlfriend. He was looking around his area and he found this place in Atwater Village, which is a perfect
place, it was an old community center, a place that somebody had turned into a
rehearsal space for bands.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao
This is the outer edge of Los Angeles.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Correct, by Los Feliz, heading into Glendale. It’s called Atwater Village, just a little town
vibe, just a main strip and this was the tallest building there. There was a
ballroom in the back and the guy rented it to us, and we said this is
perfect. There was one huge room, which is about like this [gestures to room he is in] with wood floor and it was half cylinder. It
had really crazy acoustics when you’re in the middle, you clapped your hands
and got multiple reverbs, which we thought was cool and funky, and we built a
small stage. There was two little rooms, so we tore out the wall and created a
big room for a control room. Mark was the carpenter so he had tools and just
cut a door and put in a window and a week later we had a studio. I told them
we just needed a 24-track machine and a board and we went out and purchased a two-inch tape machine and a console. I had everything else, the outboard and compressors. I
just set it all up so everything worked and the band equipment was set up on
the stage. Then we had this huge basketball area where we played basketball... in
the recording room. MCA decided to
build some skateboard ramps, as he got into skateboarding. It was like, “OK, why
not?” He took up half the court. And it was like a playhouse. It was kind of a school basically and we hung out. It kind of reminds me of the Academy
a bit and we had a bunch of people with ideas, and everyone brought in their ideas, and it was a clubhouse. We could only work at night because downstairs was
a drugstore, and they closed at six so we would start at six and could make
noise. We’d come in and play basketball and just hang out, sit till
everybody arrives and listen to music. We had turntables and we’d be DJing. We
were all record collectors and everybody was just digging back then. It was a
competition on who had the funkiest and rarest shit. We would be like, “Check
this out, check this out.” It was a good environment, everyone was turning everyone onto
different things. But the idea was to play. They would go and listen to the
Meters and would then
go and try and play the track. I had everything set up to record either on the
two-inch machine, all I had to do was hit play, and if they were just jamming around
and it didn’t sound that hot, I would just roll the DAT. That happened a lot.
Just capture the moments, and then they would come in and have a listen every
once in a while. “Hey, this is pretty neat.” And we just did that for three
years. We took a long time, and a lot of things happened in three years. One
guy made a movie, MCA went to India and Nepal and discovered Buddhism and
whatnot. Slowly everybody changes. We would come back after a few weeks of
taking a break and other ideas would come up. We were slowly collecting stuff.
Next thing you know, I had one hundred two-hour DATs of them jamming and ten
reels of songs, just jamming and ideas. We would go through and pick the best elements and keep narrowing it down.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So was it an editing process?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Editing out songs and picking out grooves. Obviously, some of the grooves were like
ten minutes long and we would go and just pick out a couple of bars sometimes
and create some songs out of looping or replaying them or adding on to the loops.
But it really started off musically, like the first half of the record, ten songs, were
playing. Then it got to the point where we had all these instrumental tracks
and we were like, “Well, you should maybe do a rap on something.” But nobody
wanted to do a rap. The first guy who stepped up to bat was MCA. He pulled me
aside and said, “I’ve got this idea, this Hendrix stuff that I really like.”
He put it together with a beat, and it was the “Jimmy
James” track. He was actually too
embarrassed to do it at the studio. So he called me up to come over to my
house — I had a little studio — and we demoed it up at the house. We both
had the samplers. We all had the same samplers, actually, and he brought the
discs over and I looped it up and timed it out for him and got it to work. We
came up with the instrumental and then he did a rough vocal over it and we
brought it back the next day to the studio and played it for the guys. The guys
were really excited and were like, “Man, I want to get on that.” And that
started up their enthusiasm of wanting to rap again because they really didn’t want to
rap after Paul’s Boutique. They were like, “Let’s just make an instrumental
record or something.” It slowly developed, like I said over three years.
Slowly, a track would show up, a month later another one and another one.
There was no hurry, no time [restrictions], the label never had a limit and
they never came down to listen to anything, which was great. I had no
pressure, it was a very fortunate situation. And I have never been in that
situation and probably never will, three years on payroll to produce
something.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Do you want to play something from Check Your Head that might be reflective
of that whole?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
This is one of the songs from that actual first rehearsal place with the two
mics on the ground, where we took some elements and created a song out of it.
But the backing track, where there is drums, a keyboard, bass and another
keyboard and some live percussion and a little bit of guitar, is everybody
playing at the same time and it turned out to be a song on the record. And
this is how it turned out.
(music: Beastie Boys – demo)
That song was patched up from a two-track live and then we added a bunch of elements and
ran the voice through the
Leslies. They were embarrassed
to do vocals and stuff so Mark actually started off singing the vocals on there.
The only way those guys were singing, they were like, “If we sing on it, put
some effects.” So we ran it through the Leslie and they kinda sang together.
Then Ad-Rock decided to sing something and I actually sang the high part,
which was me mimicking Lee Perry on something that I had listened to at home.
I was like, “We need a high voice like this.” We actually had two studios. We
had the main studio and the B studio, which was a four-track. We would take a
cassette mix of the song so that we could work in there with a little bullshit
mic plugged in and we would work on the lyrics while somebody else was working
on something else. And I grabbed the mic and did, “You could go like this” [sings high note]
with some reverb and stuff. And the guys were like, “That’s great, that’s perfect, we’ll use it.” I was like, “Should I do it
again?” They said, “No, we’ll take it right off the cassette,” and we just
flew it in. It was all just duct taped together, all these little elements,
the laugh box. The part I really liked was the scratching that comes in and
that was a total accident. I had echoes on that channel the scratching was on
and it went to the echo and it was feeding back to itself, Jamaican-style. It
sounds like a helicopter coming in and it was just a wicked effect. We were
like, “Oh, man!” We couldn’t believe it. Those are happy things that come
together that are just cool. We were just impressed with that.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So you got a co-production credit?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
That is correct. They put me down as a co-producer on the record and we had
stepped up from just engineering to throwing in elements and elements and helping to write
songs and helping to put the rap songs together.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
And how long was the studio functioning? How many records did you guys do
there after Check Your Head?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
After Check Your Head we did one other one, Ill
Communication.
After this record, it took so long we went on tour. We had some ideas together
when we came back and did the next record in six months, that was quick.
Everyone was excited and we were all confident and there were no issues and so we
focused and did it in six months. We spent one month in New York, the very
first month, we tracked some stuff like
“Sabotage” and a few other ones. It went really quick, and with the high of the first record, the second was
received a lot bigger and better and it went really well.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Do you want to play a taste of next record? So it took three years to do
Check Your Head but this one you knocked it out in six months. So the energy is slightly
different, I guess.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Very different, everyone was amped and ready and confident and had ideas and
was like, “Let’s just do it.” We really put together a good team and had a
percussionist, Eric
Bobo, who was introduced
to the group at the time and he contributed. We had this one track, which was the only one
that was different to all the other ones, kind of a rock track. And they
weren’t really trying to do rock. That was the furthest thing they wanted to
do. They wanted to stick to the funkier stuff. And this song stayed an
instrumental for a long time. Then towards the end of the record, we were just
about finishing, the last two weeks. We had attempted a couple of times to put
vocals on it and it didn’t sound right. And then Ad-Rock was like, “Let me try
it one more time to do it,” and two weeks before we finish the record and the song together and
put the vocals on it. But it almost didn’t make the record. But here it is.
(music: Beastie Boys – “Sabotage” / applause)
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So, this has a pretty heavy impact on the opening, just the way it comes in,
what was the difference?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Yauch was always loved that fuzz bass thing and they were horsing around and
try to play in a Bad Brains style. He got this riff on the bass and Bobo, our
percussionist, was very alert and was listening to it and he totally accented
it. And that marked the song right there. And as soon as we heard that, that
was it. Mark heard it and was like, “Mike, Mike, hurry up, get in there, just follow him,
just copy Bobo.” And he started doing it on the drums and it just kept
building the intensity of it. And when it finally drops they’re just droning
on one note, but it’s the intensity of it. And the vocals obviously really set it off.
Ad-Rock really gets into his high pitch and it works. It took a while to get
though, we tried it a few times, literally. That was a song I mixed it
instrumental because they didn’t have any vocals. So I went ahead and mixed it
and got it sounding as good as I could. When Ad wanted to do the vocals he
actually came to my house and I threw it on the DAT machine, on two tracks and then
added the two tracks for the vocals. Then, after he did the vocals, we did a
little scratch and some terminating scratching and sealed it up from the pre-mix that was made. It was just flying and we knocked it out. And obviously,
they made a video, which is really hilarious. Our friend Spike
Jonze did it, and it was just
perfect timing. When you hear the music and see the video they work really good.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Correct me if I’m wrong, I was smoking crack before I got here, but I heard
this story about somebody had heard “Sabotage”…
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Oh, the owner of the studio from New York was this big rocker guy, this real
rocker dude. We were there for a month recording all this stuff and the moment
he heard that song he walked in and he goes, “That’s a record right there.” He
called it right there. I was into it. He was like, “That’s
what I’m talking about.” Everyone was like, “Yeah, yeah, yeah,” they didn’t
want to do the rock thing. But the owner of the studio, he called it and said, “That’s the shit right there.” And we knew this guy was Middle America and he
was right. It did work. They just didn’t know how to approach the vocal at the
time and was left it aside until the very end. His name was Chris and we
actually called the song “Chris Rock” until it became “Sabotage” in dedication
to the guy.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
And at this point the guys started to take a little bit longer to do their records?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
After this record had huge success and the other records, all the other
records became multi-platinum. The tour was going really well. They were
playing small places and ended up playing arenas by this tour. I toured with
them doing sound front-of-house, which is also really fun: Getting to hear the
songs in studios and playing it out live. We had a quad system. We rented the
Pink Floyd rig with the joystick and we just went off and took it to the
limits. And after all the touring and everything they took a little bit of a
break. One guy got married, another guy got married, they were taking some
time off and they could relax because it was a good couple of years run we had with
Check Your Head and Ill Communication. So it took us like four years before
we got back to do the next record and I started having to branch off.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So what did you do to occupy yourself then at that point?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
By then, luckily these records did very well, and a lot of people read
the back of the records and saw my name. I was on the back of a couple of
million records. People were like, “Oh, I love that record, we love that sound.”
Check Your Head inspired a lot of bands and they wanted that sound and
wanted me to work on their record. I started getting calls. The first calls,
the hook-ups were through the management. The Beastie Boys’ manager, he also
managed Beck, so he sent Beck down to the studio and Beck wanted to do
something. He said, “Just go down to the Beasties’ studios. Mario, he’ll take
care of you.” He showed up at the studio and was like, “Someone said that I can
record some stuff here.” Oh, great, and we worked on a few tracks,
seven tracks. He ended up using one track on the
Odelay record and a few
others on B-sides. So I got to work with him and on the road we worked with
Jon Spencer Blues Explosion. They really liked the sound and the guys were
like, “We’re going to roll through town,” and they came in and wanted to use
the studio. I was like the chief engineer and they asked me to work on their
stuff with them. Then bands from Japan loved the sound, wanted to come by and
use our studio. I started getting calls luckily from the
Beasties. So it was a big thing, you know. Most people found me, looked me up through
the management and I started to work with a lot of different artists. Money
Mark also went ahead and did his first solo record and I helped him a little
bit on that, on the first one. Then he made a second one and I helped him a
lot more on the second one.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Was there any kind of adjustment for yourself, working in a pretty unique
situation with the Beasties, where you guys really knew each other well, to
sort of freelancing, essentially? Doing stuff for people you don’t have the
same relationship with? 
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Like I said, it started off gradually within the family with Beck and also DJ
Hurricane. The Beastie Boys at that point decided they wanted to start their own label. The Grand
Royal label thinking they
could do Delicious Vinyl and make their own things. It was a good idea on
paper, but it didn’t actually pan out that well. They had a few interesting
acts, the first record that was on there was actually Hurricane. That came because Hurricane wasn’t really
part of the recording process of the Beastie Boys and they said, “Well, we’ll
give you a deal. We’ll get your record and put out your record.” So I produced
the first record with Hurricane and we went in and knocked it out within a
month. We weren’t messing around, we knew he had ideas and I had ideas and it
was just me and him. That came out pretty good. It was well received and did
well, and then there was a couple of other punk rock things. Ad-Rock wanted to
do a punk rock band, and we were just utilising the studio. So I did the punk
rock band and members of a rock band called me to work with them and I liked
the band. I went and heard Mother Tongue and produced them, slowly escalating. Also, Mark ended up making a track with Los
Lobos. We did a funky track
for some compilation and they loved it and wanted to play on it. So I got to
meet them and it turned out so well that they invited me like, “Hey, we’re
going to do a song with John Lee Hooker, do you want to produce it?” “Yes, of course.” I got to do a session with John Lee Hooker and Los
Lobos, which is obviously amazing, a thrill to work with a blues legend. He is
the man, you know, literally. It was these opportunities that I had that were
definitely great to be a part of and I’m really thankful for that.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Do you want to play something that you feel particularly good about from some
of this extra work that you did?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
I’ll play one song from Mark’s record. Mark is a very eclectic person and does
a lot of recordings himself starting from home. He is a genius. We had a lot
of fun making his record, the second record, “Push the
Button.” With
this one song it was really cool, which is on a whole different tip: it is
live, everybody playing at the same time in my living room at my house, my old
house. It’s a piano, vibes, Al McKibbon on acoustic bass, an amazing guy who played with Cal Tjader, Bobo on
percussion and I had a friend Rocco on drums and I think that’s it. But here
it is. I just really like the way it sounded and I recorded it on an 8-track,
an A-DAT in fact with
Telefunken preamps. It was just
pretty simple but everyone playing together. It just sounded really nice and
we overdubbed the synthesizers.
(music: Money Mark, Al McKibben, Eric Bobo, Rocco, Mario Caldato Jr. – live jam / applause)
Not bad for live.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
All the way live.
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Which is at that point, bringing it back to the home recording is my favorite
thing to do, really. They were really good musicians there and I really
enjoyed that aspect. The Beasties was fun in a different way because it was
just the innocence of the playing. They weren’t really great musicians, but
the ideas were good behind it and the feeling. But it is definitely nice when
you have musicians who really know what they are doing and have fun. The
environment is cool, everybody enjoys it and that is something that I continue
doing, working in a small environment as much as possible.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
So you live in Brazil now, when did you move to Brazil?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
About four years ago. My wife convinced me to go back and spend some time
there and we decided it was a good thing for our family. We’ve got a couple
girls. Just to live there and hang out and check out the country which I was
born in. I don’t know much about it and I’ve started to understand it a bit
and appreciate all the good things it has to offer. But it is very
interesting, very cool, very beautiful place, good people.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
You’ve also been able to record some stuff while you’re there?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
My studio is still in Los Angeles. My studio equipment is all in my living
room, and I go there every few months to work but I have been pretty busy in
Brazil doing lots of stuff. The last tour I worked with the Beasties they
ended in South America, first-time they ever played in Brazil, and that was
what brought me back the first time. Back in, I think 1996, and I hadn’t been there
since I was ten or something. One of the bands that opened up for us asked me
to produce them and I came back later that year and produced them. And it kind
of started my relationship with Brazil and Brazilian artists and it just grew
from there.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Do you want to play something from your Brazilian recordings?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Sure. I’ll play a track from a good friend of mine, Marcelo
D2, he was in this band called
Planet Hemp, which is kind of a
very Beastie-inspired kind of band. They did rock, rap and funky jams and everything else in between. I did a few records with them and then he went
solo and worked more on the hip-hop, Brazilian hip-hop. This is from his
second record and it was really a cool mix.
(music: Marcelo D2 – unknown / applause)
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Is your approach different at all doing stuff down there as opposed to what you were doing before?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Hip-hop stuff is inspired from records and grooves, so the beats are kind of
the same. It’s just the samples instead of being funk and soul records are
bossa nova records and groovy Brazilian music, samba and whatnot. It’s great,
hip-hop is universal and is everywhere you go. You have Japanese hip-hop,
Brazilian hip-hop and Irish hip-hop, just whatever, it works. It’s the beat
that keeps it together and you can bring whatever elements, bagpipes, and it’s all good.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Do you feel like a hip-hop guy?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
I do. I happen to fit in the groovy hip-hop category, not the hardcore
category. I think it is a cool thing to be a part of and I’m really happy that
the artists I have worked with have crossed over a lot of different ways,
which is what music is all about: Crossing over and bridging stuff and
different generations. Taking old elements, and new elements, the best of both
and putting them together in a musical way.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Just a couple of other folks you want to mention that you’ve also worked with, so people get an idea of the range of it?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
The Brazilian stuff. I was fortunate to work with a whole bunch of bands:
Molotov of Mexico, Day
One from the UK, which I
really like. I also hooked up with Jack Johnson, which was a very wonderful
experience. He was a guy who did a record, that, when it first came out didn’t get very much
response, and then after 9/11 or something, people kind of got conscious. Someone
on a record label heard his lyrics and stuff and thought this guy is pretty
cool and they put him out on a major and he had some success. His manager
called me to do a remix of a song and I was like, “Yeah, sure.” And I heard
this song and the guy sent me the tracks and it was all live, playing live. I
thought it was a little tricky to do the remix as I would have to have a
musician come in and play, so I said, “Why don’t you guys just come down and
do a remake of the song?” So we recorded at the house and he came over and we
set it up in a living room and the bedroom, the vocals and guitar. He was really
comfortable and he really enjoyed it and liked it and the remix is cool. I
added some vibes and stuff and it was pretty cool. And he asked me, he goes, “You know, I
want to do my next record. I want you to do it.” And I said, “Sure, that would
be great.” He said, “I want to record it like this, though. I like this vibe.”
He was going to buy a house and he said, “I want to buy a house, build a studio.”
He said, “If I go and buy a house, will you have a look at it and tell me if
we can build a studio?” I said, “Sure.” He said, “It’s in Hawaii though,” and I said, “I’m going to Hawaii next month.” So I went to Hawaii and went to go check out the garage and said,
“This is it right here, this is perfect.” His brother was a contractor so
he drew up the plans and my friend helped me design the control room. He built
a control room, and it’s a total homely vibe with a garage and a little studio.
We did his record, the second record On and
On and his
third record there. And
those records did really incredibly well. They had incredible exposure, people
were listening to organic music, acoustic guitar, bass and drums. He was
getting mainstream attention, which was really, really great and it was very successful.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Do you want to share a little taste of something from that and then we will
open things up a little bit for questions?
(music: Jack Johnson – “Traffic In the Sky”)
Mario Caldato Jr. 
Jack has an amazing voice. He played that song for me on just an acoustic
guitar before we started recording. He was just like, “Check out this song,
see what you think of it.” He just played and sang it and it was so deep, I
said, “That is amazing.” The lyrics and everything, and he explained what the
song is about and I said, “That is the real deal right there.” The guitar and
the voice and he laid it down. It was the easiest project to work on. It was so simple, the elements, the song, the simplicity and his voice, it was incredible, a pleasure to work with him. He’s a great guy.
Audience Member 
How did the collaboration with
Q-Tip on “Get It
Together” come about?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
He was a friend of the band, a New York cat, and whenever the New York cats rolled
into town they would call up the Beasties and hang out. They knew we had a
studio, Biz Markie was also always
around and rolled by the studio, and Q-Tip, we were trying to play him some stuff,
like, “We’ve got these tracks here and they’ve got no vocals. What do you
think?” He heard that one track, the “Get It Together” one, which was actually
the only one that Mike D had put together. He had found that one and sampled
the beat and put a beat and loop together, and he said, “This one here is
good, this one’s dope.” We put him in the control room, everything was
handheld… That is another thing on Check Your Head, all the vocals were
handheld, most of them were SM-58s
with the guys cupping the mic. A lot of times I had a bullshit mic that we called a
karaoke mic. A Sony variety karaoke mic, $29, that I bought in Little Tokyo that is amazing. It has pitch and you can octave to high and low and all these
effects, and it had perfect distortion on it. So “What’Cha Want” is an example
of that microphone. That’s no preamp, just the microphone directly into the
console. We would plug it in, Q-Tip grabbed the mic and he just, “One-two,
one-two…,” went off the top of his head. It was all off the top of his head.
He ad-libbed it, and in three minutes did a take and then another track. We
did another take and then out of the two tracks we muted out all the parts
that we didn’t like and we only kept the parts we liked. Then we mapped out the
song and the guys did the lyrics in between. They took whatever his rhyme was,
and then Ad-Rock would respond, and we knew what the next rhyme was already so
he would end a rhyme and connect them. Then Mike D would come in, and it was a
puzzle. We put it together and fill in the blanks basically.
Audience Member 
How did he feel about the muting of Q-Tip’s voice?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
That is how we worked. It was all about turning stuff on and off. I had a
little MIDI mute that remembered all the mutes and the automation so that was
helpful. And we would just turn it on and off and it would just play it back that
way.
Audience Member
That’s a crazy track, man.
Audience Member 
I got a few questions, actually. You said that “Wild Thing” was recorded in a
closet. What kind of mic did you use to get Tone to sound like that in the
closet?
Mario Caldato Jr. 
A Sennheiser 421, the black dynamic
microphone. It was the best mic I had at the time and I just mounted it inside
the vocal thing with one of those arms, because there was no room. It was literally a chair
and he had to sit there with their headphones and that was it. It was a
dynamic mic, so it took a lot of sound pressure and it worked. It’s a good
rap mic, actually we used for the Beasties on Hello
Nasty.
Russell Elevado
You have been a big influence for me. I was listening to the Beasties when I was
doing stuff with Voodoo and the Roots and I just wanted to thank
you for paving the way. I’m going to pick your brain later on as well, I am
not done with you yet.
Jeff “Chairman” Mao 
Well, let’s all, in addition to Russ, thank Mr. Mario Caldato for being here.
