In the very early ’90s Mark Pritchard stepped into the music business, teaming up with Tom Middleton to form Global Communication and record many different styles of music under various project names. Since then he’s made records as Troubleman for Far Out Records, Harmonic 33 on Warp and collaborated with Steve Spacek to create some of the most unique productions in today’s music world. Mark has also worked at several Red Bull Music Academy editions as part of the studio/music production crew, although in 2002 it was time to turn the spotlight on him and hear all about his many guises.
Mark Pritchard 
I live in the South-West of England and have been making music for around 12
years now. I started making music in my spare time while I was a chef.
Eventually, I made enough money from the music to do it full time, which I've
been doing ever since. I started DJing and making music with friends and then
pressed up my first white label. In those days you would just do a white label
EP, 500 copies or whatever, and just put it out there.
RBMA 
 And you were DJing in your local area?
Mark Pritchard: 
Yeah, just like local clubs, and a friend of mine started to promote local
clubs. We did like one EP and then and I was DJing in a place called Taunton,
in the West Country, and it was really a good club night. And that was a good
time because you could play everything. You could play hip hop, you could play
all the genres that were closely linked by tempo as well, apart from obviously
hip hop. All the techno and house that was coming out, the early breakbeat
scene, and the early sort of drum & bass, rave scene was all around 120 to
130 [bpms]. So, you could literally play everything, which was really nice.
You could go through anything, which I enjoyed. And then after a night at this
club a guy came up to me and said: "I just moved to Taunton from Cornwall and
I thought this place would have nothing going on, but you just played all the
tunes that I like." He just said: "I make music and I work with this guy
called the Aphex Twin." I went back to his house that night and he played me
Aphex Twin tracks for about five hours.
RBMA: 
What year are we talking about here?
Mark Pritchard 
I think it was about '91/'90, something like that. I was setting up my own
label at the time and we just kept in contact, and eventually, we decided to
set up the first label that we started, called Evolution
Records. I'd already done the first release and after that we started
working together on tracks.
RBMA: 
And this release was under the name of...?
Mark Pritchard: 
Reload. We just built it from
there and from that label the Reload project, Global Communication was born,
and Link, which eventually ended up on Warp.
RBMA: 
So you're history with Tom Middleton is quite a long one.
Mark Pritchard: 
Yeah,Speaker: 
we worked together 'till about '96/'97-ish.
RBMA: 
What kind of style would you say that was?
Mark Pritchard 
  Sort of inspired by Detroit techno and industrial music because some of it
was pretty distorted and heavy. And also, soundtracks and ambient artists like
Brian Eno, Vangelis and those sort of people. At that time people were quite
anal about techno. It's like techno had to be a certain thing, house had to be
a certain thing, had to sound a certain way. If you were a techno artist and
then went to do some house music, then people were like: "That's not a techno
guy, it's not proper stuff." People were really, really hardcore about it. So
we just thought, "Well, let's just use another name. Let's change the name, do
another project, put it out there, and not really telling anybody about it and
let it do its thing."
RBMA: 
Do you think that worked to your advantage?
Mark Pritchard: 
It didn't. I mean, it had to be done that way but it just confused people. I
mean, I'm even confused by some names I've got and people were end up saying:
"Oh, you did that!" And I'm like, "I just get bored of doing the same stuff
all the time." And also, I wanted to avoid the classic, do an album, and then
do another album but it hasn't got the vibe of the first one. The first album,
or the first couple of things have got a certain energy about it, and then it
becomes a bit more like repeating itself after that. There might be the odd
good track but then you would always look back to the early stuff. So I was
really happy the way it went. It wasn't really that intentional, but that way
you do an album and then you move on do something else, and you learn from
doing that style. And you learn things that will help when you go back doing
that style again. You learn just so much from doing all the different styles
and techniques all the time.
RBMA 
What kind of things were inspiring you?
Mark Pritchard 
 Early on, I suppose, Detroit techno was a massive influence, really. When I
started going to clubs I started to hear a lot of the early Detroit techno,
Chicago house and New York house, all at the same time. So the first releases
were quite techno-sounding. I was into Derrick
May,CarlCraig, Kevin
Saunderson,JuanAtkins, all
those people. After the Global Communication album, in about '93/'94 we started a
project called the Jedi Knights.
RBMA 
What was that?
Mark Pritchard 
The idea behind it was that a lot of club music was losing its funk, it was
all getting very serious. And we were like: "Look, we wanna get the funk back
into stuff." And that was it, so it was like electro-y, some of it was p-funk,
house stuff, there was some fusion-y stuff, a mixture of breaks of all sorts,
and we released the Jedi Knights album on our own label. We did no press or
anything, it was just one of those timing things as it sold really well. We
couldn't believe it.
RBMA 
So you could buy yourself a nice flash car.
Mark Pritchard 
No, unfortunately I invested it in putting out lots of other music. So we put
it all back into the label, and then 'round about '97/'98, there was some real
distribution problems in the UK.
RBMA 
Can you explain a bit about that?
Mark Pritchard 
The company we were with was absolutely amazing, and our label managers and
all the exporters were really into the music we were doing, and we had a
really good relationship and we were selling really well. They did a good job
and then they merged with another company and most of the good people from the
company that we were with got sacked. When we went to this new company our
sales dropped dramatically overnight.
RBMA 
Can that be attributed just to the fact that the new staff didn't had an idea
about the kind of music that you were making and the contacts you had in the
past?
Mark Pritchard 
I think it's really important if your have a label to have really good
relationships with the people there and that they really understand the music.
Because if they're really into the music and they're on the phone and they're
just saying, "I got the new bla bla, and it's wicked," then you're gonna sell
a lot more records. When you go to a company where they are maybe not into the
same sort of thing, and they're selling your thing without any passion, then
it really is gonna hit your sales. We literally dropped by 50% or maybe more.
It was really, really tricky and we stupidly didn't stop the label, we tried
our hardest to keep it going. By doing that we incurred massive debts, and all
of a sudden we were like, "Shit! We got to close it down."
RBMA 
 Is that a lot of money we are talking about?
Mark Pritchard 
 A lot of money, yeah. We couldn't liquidate the company either, so we had to
pay the debts back, which was really harsh. It took like three years probably
to clear it. Luckily, I was signed to Island Records at that point and the
advance I got for that helped pay quite a bit of the debt and then I just had
to find work like remixing. At that point I just had to get as much money and
as quick as I could and remixing is the only way of getting instant cash.
RBMA 
From that point on, about '98/'99, you and Tom started to do separate
projects.
Mark Pritchard 
Tom had moved to London right around '97 and when that happened we worked
together less and less. I went to focus on more experimental stuff and tried
to learn how to make hip hop.
Participant 
I heard your first record was "Roobarb &
Custard," is this true?
(laughter)
Mark Pritchard 
 No, that's not true. When I was working as a chef I was making music all the
time, and I started going to clubs and the rave scene was kicking off. My
friends and I decided to do a white label of an EP, I had already done like
four tracks. Then, one night coming back from the club we were joking about
cheesy, rave, cartoon, nonsense tunes and the next day I just made this track
using a part of a cartoon that I liked when I was a kid. And they were like,
"We just put it on a 12 'cause it might help sell a few copies." 'Cause  we
were really worried about paying my mate's debt back, the money we needed to
press the records. So we just put it on and it went like top ten.
RBMA 
What top ten, national charts?
Mark Pritchard 
Yeah, like christmas top ten. It went to number 7.
RBMA 
Wow! Were you actually on Top Of The Pops?
Mark Pritchard 
Yeah, went on twice.
RBMA 
 Really, you? Top Of The Pops?
Mark Pritchard 
Yeah, very surreal experience. It was good because I got to see the dark side
of the industry from the early stage. Because I got ripped off really, really
badly with that tune . I was just a young kid from the West Country, and when
I was taking the tune around no one was interested.
RBMA 
When you say "taking around," to record companies?
Mark Pritchard 
 No, just to shops. We would press five hundred, just drive around to
different shops, go to London and trying to sell it. And people were like, "We
have five or a couple." An we were like, "Shit!" Then we went to one shop in
Southampton and the guy just said: "Look, I want all of them. I want another
1,000 on Monday." And then, within a week, the guy said: "This is gonna be
massive."
RBMA: 
Where's your head now?
Mark Pritchard 
At the moment I'm doing mainly two projects. One is called Troubleman, which
is for a label called Far Out, which is a label that got mainly famous
Brazilian artists from years back and encourages them to do new albums,
encouraging them to do new albums, got them back in the studio doing new
music, not just sort of reissuing compilations.
RBMA 
So you did a couple of mixes for Azymuth?
Mark Pritchard 
Yeah, I think me and Tom did a mix for "Jazz Carnival" about like '96/'97 and
then I just found out that someone was doing a remix, reissue thing with "Jazz
Carnival" through a journalist and then I just phoned Far Out and just said:
"Look, I heard you are doing this thing for Azymuth. I really love Azymuth and
I want to do a mix." And I did a mix for nothing and it did really, really
well, but lost contact with Joe for a while. Then he phoned me up again: "Do
you want to do more mixes?" I was like, "Yeah, definitely." Then he paid me a
bit more than what he would have paid me, just to thank me for doing the first
one. Then he said: "Do you want to do an album?" I was like, "Yeah, OK. Cool."
This is the first Azymuth remix I did on my own, it's very crappy, my version.
(music: Azymuth - Jazz Carnival (Space Jazz remix))
RBMA 
When you did the remix, what parts did they give you?
Mark Pritchard 
I just got a DAT of all the parts: drums, bass, keys, and I just put a drum
beat in, took a bit of the bass, got that grooving and just messed around with
it, started vibing, playing things on top. Then I got a friend of mine come in
and play as well some extra keys live over the top.
Participant 
When you do a remix like this, did he want you to do a certain sound, put
pressure on you what kind of direction the remix he wants you to go?
Mark Pritchard 
Luckily, with Joe from Far Out, in fact, it's probably the best remix commission
I've ever had. He just said: "Do whatever you want," and paid me all the money
upfront, which never happened [before]. Chasing money from labels is one of my
biggest nightmares. From the smallest to the biggest labels, it's all the
same, it's a nightmare. And Joe was like: "Here's the cheque for all the
money, do whatever you want. I trust you." And that was it, which was wicked
'cause it took me completely at ease, and it almost, in a way, made me want to
do even more of an effort.
Participant 
When you work on a remix, do you try to keep the same feeling of the original
track or try to do something completely different?
Mark Pritchard 
If I'm doing the remix 'cause I like the track, then I will maybe try and keep
what that track's about. But unfortunately, most of the remixes I've done the
original elements have been terrible. At that point I try and make something
out of those, you know, take some sounds off the DAT and just fuck around and
try and make something out of it. Sometimes I just get a groove going and make
a track and then the problems is trying to get something of the track into the
track that I like.
RBMA 
I hear you use a really interesting
guy near you [for vinyl
cutting and mastering]?
Mark Pritchard 
 Yeah, there is a guy about half an hour from where I live in the West Country
and he is just unbelievable. I mean, he does stuff to the music that is
just... I put the DAT on and it sounds OK, and when you listen to what he's
done to it, and you go back to the DAT, I just feel depressed. Through that I
learned loads and loads about mixdown 'cause I see the problems I was always
getting and I go back and make sure next time I really watch that, and I do
lots of different passes to DAT with different things, louder, quieter, then I
go in again and next time it might be a bit better, and then there might be
something else wrong. He's just amazing 'cause he's been cutting for a long,
long time. He started off cutting for Island Records, and he used to cut all
the Bob Marley stuff, all the Island Records stuff, David Bowie, hits after
hits after hits all those years. He just got a really good ear, no matter what
music you take to him, he gets what it needs and he will try anything to make
it sound how you want it to sound. He really wired the studio before because
he thought he would get a slightly better level doing it a different way and
he got lots of old school bits of valve gear, and he also got a lot of the new
technology. He is really on the new technology because he found that a lot of
the new technology hasn't got the same sound as the analogue sound. So he
tried a lot of different experiments to try and get the digital stuff sound
like analogue tape, the warmth and the clarity. Even down to the wiring, the
recommended wiring on his systems, he didn't like the sound of the system when
he first bought it, and he changed the wiring and used some cheaper cable and
it sounded much better. The cable they recommended, he said, "There is
something wrong here." He phoned the company up and said: "Look, your system
doesn't sound right. I use this cheap cable and it sounds better now." And
they said: "No, you can't use that cheap stuff." And he's like, "Use your
ears, it sounds better." And now they give him to test their gear, basically.
It is hard to find this in cutting rooms and it's a massive part making or
breaking a record.
Participant 
What's the name of the company?
Mark Pritchard: 
It's called Loud Mastering and it's in Taunton
in the West Country.
RBMA: 
Tell us a little bit more about this Harmonic 33 thing.
Mark Pritchard 
The Harmonic 33 project has been going for quite a while. Basically, I wanted
to focus on making hip hop. I've always loved hip hop but never really tried
to make it and never got near making it properly. The other reason for
focusing on hip hop, apart from the fact that I really wanted to make it and
love it, is that, a lot of the music I like, club music, was made by people
that were hip hop heads. I knew that by mastering hip hop music, it would
really benefit all the other music that I was gonna make. Because down to all
the house music that I liked, like Kenny
Dope, he is a hip
hop head, and his beats were rough, and were done on an SP in hip hop way. And
that was the stuff I was always drawn to in that scene. The drum & bass
stuff that I was really into, especially a guy called Danny
Breaks, who has a
label called Droppin' Science, again, he is just a hip hop head and got into
making drum & bass. I like the feel and the sound and the creativity
that's going into his music. You know, more interesting samples, not the same
old drum break everybody uses, he was searching for new, fresh breaks. So I
knew through doing that it would help everything and it definitely did.
(music: Harmonic 33 - The Holy
Track)
I suppose, early on, when I started to do hip hop stuff I was using the
SP-12 to start writing the
track. I get the basic groove and the samples going through the SP-12, and
then I put it across into Logic and then either run the SP alongside synched
with Logic or I dump the MIDI information into Logic and carry on working
inside Logic. What I really like about drum machine programming is the timing
and the feel and the sound. The SP's got an incredible feel about it, and the
thing I noticed about using computers is that it's harder to get that feel
with a computer. Through programming a beat on an SP, recording the MIDI
information into the computer, and then just looking at where it was placing
each part of the drum beat and where it puts the music to trigger the samples,
I noticed it was doing really interesting things, also to the tempo. Logic
tracks the tempo when you put MIDI into it, and the tempo is going up and down
subtly. All the different parts of the beat were all moved to different
places. Like, the hi-hat's were late, kick drums were very much much bang on,
snares were often slightly late, and through doing that I learned how to
program on the computer and get the sound I wanted with the SP. The last
Harmonic 33 EP was mainly done all in Logic. The thing that I find, I always
tried to be honest with what I do, and just make music from the heart, no
matter how hard it's been. 'Cause it's definitely hard to make it in the music
industry. Lots of ups and downs, but you just got to keep pushing on, keep
believing in yourself and not get caught up in the bullshit 'cause there's
definitely an awful lot of bullshit in this industry. A lot of egos get
boosted up along the way, and I just try to avoid all that sort of shit. Just
keep doing what you believe in, and if you put the effort in, I think you do
get the bonuses. You may feel like, "Fuck, why am I doing this stuff and not
make any money?" But I found, and through a lot of people I know, you keep
plugging away and keep doing your stuff, you will get something back. I found
that over the years, there's been times I'vebeen like, "Shit, why am I putting
all this effort in and I'm skinned?" But then, all of a sudden, something will
happen.
RBMA 
Mark Pritchard, thank you very much indeed.
