Maseo of De La Soul sat down on the Red Bull Music Academy couch for Boombox’s 5th annual celebration of the life and music of J Dilla in Los Angeles. In his discussion with Cognito from Frolab, he discussed the art of the posse cut, sampling, meeting J Dilla, and more.
COGNITO 
Yes, yes. So this is incredible, like, word?
[laughter]
Once again, my story kind of is the same thing.
Maseo 
Let me first say my rebuttal to
Shaheed. God does
have a sense of humor. He made DJ Maseo.
[laughter]
COGNITO 
No doubt, no doubt. Word. Yeah, 1989, man. Three Feet High and
Rising. [applause]
Once again, I’m 19-years-old, can’t believe what I’m hearing. It’s like,
“What? You all are talking to me.” This isn’t like listening to “The
Message.” I knew all the words to
“The Message” at nine-, ten-years-old, but I didn’t known what none of that
meant, but something about this cut right here, which I bet y’all didn’t know,
this is the man that produced it.
(music: De La Soul – “Me Myself and
I” / applause)
Tell me about that record, man. How old were you when you did that?
Maseo 
I was actually 15-years-old when I was playing around with it on the sampler.
I had a Casio SK-1 sampler I
bought from Wiz Records and Tapes.
COGNITO 
[sings] ”Nobody beats the Wiz!”
Maseo 
It had the little four orange pads on it that you could play with the
different samples. You could sample four different compositions, and you had
to put it up to the speaker. There was no input to get real audio, so I put it
up to the speaker to get the sound I was trying to catch. It took forever to
do, but when I finally got it, it was on, put it down to the four-track. We
only really had three tracks to really work with, but put it down to the four-track, and I sat on it since 1985. I was 15. I was working with a different
artist at that time, a different rapper at that time. It was my uncle’s best
friend, lived around the corner. My uncle went to school, actually graduated
high school with him. They graduated high school with him and Prince Paul. I had moved to
Long Island around ’84, so ’85, things started really kind of picking up
behind DJing and I playing basketball around the neighborhood. Brooklyn cats,
we just get everywhere. I’m originally from Brooklyn New York where Ali’s
from, and trying to do that song for the other rapper, he didn’t like it, just
as much as my group don’t like it as well. He didn’t like it. Paul always
thought it was cool, but it wasn’t his project. We were both called onto a
project, me as just a new cat with new energy and Paul as the senior around
the neighborhood who was doing this thing with Stetsasonic already. The person
that signed the rapper - I don’t want to say his name - but the person that
signed the rapper, my uncle’s friend, he was my music teacher. He taught at
Amityville Junior High School and High School. He also wrote for Surface, and
he wrote for the Isley Brothers, and he saw the ‘surgence of hip hop growing
at that period in time, so he started an independent label and wanted to put
this guy out. We did a covered version of “God...,” not “God Make Me
Funky” but
“Seven Minutes of Funk.” It was
wack. Really, really wack. Really, really, really wack. Really, really, really
wack. Paul and I really connected behind this project. We went out in the car,
had to be two-three in the morning, one session, spending so much time working
on one record. He truly asked me, how did I feel about this? I was like, “Yo
man, I really don’t like it.” I was like, “I even told them I don’t like it””
but at 15, this was my opportunity to go to the studio, go further than the
four-track, and embark upon my dream. It wasn’t working for me, it wasn’t
working for Paul, and that’s where we really connected at that point. I was
like, “I really got some other stuff I want to play for you.” That was the
stuff I had been working on with… I call them Dave and Merce, y’all. You know
them as Trugoy and Posdnuos. Dave was Trugoy.
Posdnuos is Merce. These are my childhood friends. They were closet MCs. No
one knew they rapped. No one. Pos actually used to DJ a little something. Dave
used to do the human beat box. They used to be part of another group called EZ
Street, like a year prior to us really connecting, and Dave wrote the rhymes
for everybody, so did Pos, but Pos DJed, and Dave was the human beat box, and
he was really good. The turn of the guards came ’85, summer school. We was all
going to summer school. The school was right across the street from my house,
so we were done with class like by 11 a.m., so we piling up at my house. We
got together behind a mutual friend who was a fourth member of the group.
Can’t mention his name either. Sorry, folks. He was actually the person who
brought us all together. Really, when we heard Ultramagnetic [MCs], and I have
to also say when we saw Doug E Fresh and the Get Fresh Crew and Slick Rick, it was
featuring MC Ricky D at the time, and we was like, “Wow, a four-man group, two
DJs, Chill Will, Barry B.” That’s who me and the other cat was like. We was
like our own version of Chill Will and Barry B. But he became pretty
obnoxious, something that didn’t fit the followed and wound up X-ing himself
out. Paul didn’t want to work with him either, but when it all came together,
he was out the picture. Paul told us to come to the studio, actually come by
his house, and we had a meeting. Once I played him the demos, he was like,
“This is everything I’ve been trying to do with Stet, so I would like for you
all to come by my house, and let’s talk about this.” The first thing he said
out the gate: “We can definitely take this to the studio and clean it up. I
can’t make anybody any promises. I don’t know if you’re going to get a deal or
not, but this is definitely something I’m into creatively.” He was playing me
all the stuff that he was doing with Stet, and then when I played him the
stuff we were doing, he played me some stuff he submitted for Stet that was
getting turned down, completely up our alley. We hooked up. The guys was kind
of nervous, because here it is: they never rapped publicly. Never until this
point in time linking up with Paul. Me, I been DJing since I was 6-years-old.
I’ve been carrying records and speakers for other DJs trying to get my time to
shine at a block party, and I would catch it. Twelve-years-old, I got my first
shot on Woodburn between Wilson and Knickerbocker in Bushwick. That was my
first shine, twelve-years-old, being able to DJ a block party. Prior to that, the
best party I ever did was my mom’s housewarming party. That was off the chain.
I got to stay up crazy late, so I DJed. That was off the hook, ’82, that was a
great year. That was like I felt like my induction into hip hop. I felt like
I’m a part of this. I started meeting certain people. Stephanie Mills didn’t
live too far, and she was into hip hop. They was going to see Grandmaster
Flash, places I couldn’t go to.
COGNITO 
Right.
Maseo 
I was knowing people like her on a first-name basis. Gwen Guthrie, I got to
meet her before she passed, I met her in Quad Studios. That’s how long Quad
Studios have been around. I met her when I was 14. I mean, I’m like, “Ms.
Guthrie,” but she was like, “Honey, call me Gwen.” That was like real moments
for me, and I made my first $300 DJing, and I felt like I was in the business,
I’m in.
COGNITO 
Wait. $300, what year was this?
Maseo 
My first $300 DJing, it was ’84. No, ’85, Long Island. It was in Long Island.
Kool G Rap came to the party. He had just came out with “It’s a Demo” and all
of that, so he was getting around. Actually, DJ Polo had some family in our
neighborhood, so they were coming to all the backyard parties. Every rapper
was showing up to cookouts. That was the thing. Hip hop for us was on the
weekend, even on a mainstream level. It was only on the weekend. If you caught
it any other part of the week, it was late-night with the [World Famous]
Supreme Team, and if your mother caught you out, you in trouble. [laughs] So
the Supreme Team or Mr. Magic or even Dr. Dre from Original Concept, Big Dr.
Dre. These were our outlets for hip hop if we didn’t catch Red
[Alert] or Chuck
Chillout, or Marley [Marl] on the
weekend, and it was really late at night or wee hours in the morning.
Everybody came out to Long Island, to college parties, to promote whatever
they were doing, and when I saw G Rap at a party I was DJing, I was like, “I’m
on.” He came up to me, said, “What’s up?” I obviously was doing something
right. He was feeling me. He said, “What’s up?” Prince Markie Dee, another one
that was coming around early on, so these are people I got familiar with at a
very young age before I was even thinking about a record deal, moreso thinking
about getting ready for the weekend. My connection with Paul and hearing
Rakim come out, hearing
Ultramagnetic, of course, Run DMC, that’s when us as a collective said, “We
want to really take this serious and make records.” We were already playing
around making demos, but to actually want to get out there and pursue this as
a dream, it was those groups. It was really Ultramagnetic that was the
catalyst to wanting to be different and speak your own language. Let alone,
they still had the hardcore Bronx image, but Kool Keith was on something else,
man. That was the inspiration to be like, “Yeah, we going to be different.
We’re going to come out with our own language. We going to make you believe
what we believe.”
COGNITO 
“Strickly Dan Stuckie.”
Maseo 
Yeah, “Strickly Dan Stuckie” just mean, “Yo, that shit is fresh.” [laughs]It’s fresh. [laughs]
COGNITO 
Around that time, with Three Feet High and Rising, there was another
particular song that… I mean, “Me, Myself and I” clearly is a song that put
you all on the map.
Maseo 
Yes.
COGNITO 
But there’s a classic on that album, and for that time period, to understand
that that album had more tracks than I think any other album in history as far
as I knew.
Maseo 
To be honest, the record that truly put us on the map was “Potholes In My
Lawn.”
COGNITO 
Well, yeah, yeah.
Maseo 
That was the record that put us on the map. That was the first video, first
introduction into mainstream culture. “Plug Tunin’“ got us love in New York,
and the name De La Soul got us love with the Latino community.
[laughter]
Everybody thought I was either Dominican or Puerto Rican. Seriously. But it
was “Potholes In My Lawn,”and “Jennifer” had played a big role
in that also, because that was bouncing off of Jungle Brothers
“Jimbrowski.” Jenny was like the
answer to “Jimbrowski.”
COGNITO 
I say that for me because living in DC, Virginia area, I knew those songs, but
it was “Me, Myself and I” that got the general public knowing. I think that
video and that song probably got more play than “Potholes” may have.
Maseo 
Yeah, it did.
COGNITO 
There’s also another song that I want to play right now that you all probably
didn’t know he had something to do with this.
(music: De La Soul – “Buddy”/ applause)
I want to ask a question…
Maseo 
Thank you, thank you, thank you, salutations, thank you.
COGNITO 
[laughs]What happened to the art of the posse cut? This particular song was
the epitome of a collaboration at that point in time to where we are today,
how people collaborate with each other. Other artists collaborate with each
other, but it now seems to be like, “Yo, B, I got this beat, I’m going to pass
you this in ProTools, you know what I’m saying? Spit 16 [bars] on there, get
back to me.”
Maseo 
It’s contrived.
COGNITO 
Right. Talk about the process of “Buddy.”
Maseo 
It was a natural process. I did the beat, and we had been really just sitting
on it. I honestly just happened to walk in the studio one day, and to the
right of me was Mike G with a pad, Pos sitting at the mixing desk, Afrika’s in
the mic booth. I just walked in, and dudes is laying rhymes to my beat. I have
to take a page from Shaheed. That’s God, man, making that happen like that. I
just thought it was a cool track. I thought it fit what we were doing. I
didn’t expect it to be that. Later come
Q-Tip. That was that day,
and we all had really just met. A week prior to that, we did a show with
Jungle [Brothers] somewhere in Boston. We had been running to each other
periodically - [burps] excuse me, Guinness is hitting me. Right before we
came out with “Plug Tunin’“ we used to go to Latin Quarters a lot, and
everybody at that time was wearing something different or doing something
different, especially if you was an up and coming artist, you did something,
that signature of yourself. We made these plug clocks. The clock thing was
always something that was like... I mean, Flava [Flav] definitely took it to
the next level, but wearing the clock, wearing the pouches, that was something
that was going on in New York, just Flava epitomized it. We kind of snatched
that a little bit. We had these plug clocks, and we had the plug logo that we
were wearing to the club, and we would wear these sequined outfits, the Gumby
haircut. We just looked different from everybody who was rocking Kangol’s or
whatever. We looked crazy. Afrika sorted us out. Red [Alert] sorted us out. Of
course, Paul introduced us to everybody, and when everybody got hit with the
record, it was really more, that added the extended excitement. Afrika was
like, “Wow, we are like Mars, we kind of on the same thing,” and we were like,
“Yes, we are. We love the Jungle Brothers.” That was that moment of
communication over the music. Then the show came about, then the invitation to
the studio. Mind you, I didn’t know they were going to be in the studio. I
walk in. Mike with a pad, Afrika in the booth, Pos had the port, Q-Tip comes
later. We got this song called “Buddy.” Once the song was done, we immediately
start to perform it. I hadn’t even met Ali yet. That was the thing. I myself
hadn’t met him yet. I was still in school. Here it is, sorry y’all, but I got
left back because I cut school to record Three Feet High and Rising, so I
wound up graduating a year later than everybody else. [laughs] Pos had
already graduated, Dave had already graduated, and the opportunity kept coming
to make this record. I truly was getting ready to head to the military. I was
involved with a lot of street culture that I wasn’t very happy with doing
myself, so I was really about to go to the military, and I said, “If I’m going
to die somewhere, let me go get some medals and die. I mean, not die on these
streets around here.” But the Creator is who he is, man. This opportunity kept
coming. The gut feeling kept hitting, “You need to do this.” Even my last
year, they talked me into playing football. I quit playing football because
the dream was clicking. Every time I looked up it was clicking. I managed it
somehow. I was going to the club, meeting up with the fellows, then next thing
you know getting off the train, going straight to school. My mom didn’t have a
clue what was going on. Everything was definitely chaotic. Come on, 17, 18,
you’re trying to figure yourself out. You are going through these “identify
crises” trying to figure out who you are as a teenager. With this opportunity
presenting itself, it was scary, but we pursued it. Pos dropped college. Dave
dropped college. Here it is, I’m fumbling with high school, but my intentions
was always to finish, which I did. We did the album all through ‘88. Guys
waited for me to finish before we really hit the road. I’ll never forget Lyor
[Cohen] and Russell [Simmons] coming
up to the school, discussing my situation and presenting all of this press and
everything that, how well things were taking off, and mind you, there was even
a major improvement in my grades. I was tired. I used to miss my first three
periods, and mind you, behind missing my first three periods, I even had to go
to night school. I did all of that just to finish high school and pursue this
dream. It was a scary time but amazing at that point in time, kids just
following their dreams and not sure where this thing is going to go. Even when
you’re talking to the label, and they’re going, “Yo, this is really great
effort, but we don’t expect it to do well. We love this kind of music.” That’s
one thing I can say about Tommy Boy. Great place to create. Next to all the…
Every label’s wack, but this was the best of the worst, how I feel. We had our
freedom, but they didn’t anticipate any success, and I thought, “Okay, after
the release of this Three Feet High and Rising, I’m going to the service.”
But right after graduation, I was on tour with LL Cool J, NWA, Public Enemy,
Too Short, Hammer, 357, the list goes on. It was like the whole hip hop
ensemble. Everybody that existed in hip hop and that was somebody, whether you
had the hottest record out there at that time with no sales or you had the
sales, everybody was on that tour.
COGNITO 
That ticket would be like $20.
Maseo 
Shit, $20. $20. Now, it’s like $100 plus for one act at that. All of these
acts, and ticket would be like $20. Arenas would be packed. It was a milestone
in my life really next to going on tour with Tribe.
COGNITO 
Word. So that particular album also brought y’all a lesson with sample
clearance. I know you spoke on this on the documentary that I had the pleasure
of working on called Copyright
Criminals. If y’all
haven’t seen it, y’all should check it out. Speak on what that did to the
whole soundscape of music.
Maseo 
It created a new business, definitely. Sampling became a significant business.
When we first released our debut, we followed all the requirements to hand in
sample clearances and make sure things were dealt with. Tommy Boy was in
control of the administration. All we had to do is fill out the forms and hand
them in, but they were in control of the administration, so they felt like
certain things like “Transmitting Live From
Mars” was insignificant to clear
because it was just such a small skit. Who’s going to really pay attention to
something so silly as that? Well, that was the very first thing that came to
bite us. There was a public lawsuit out there from The Turtles for a million
dollars. We settled out of court for $50,000. Due to our miscommunication,
whatever the shuffle was, we end up going half with Tommy Boy on the bill, but
when it comes to sample clearances, you’re always at the mercy of the
negotiation, whoever owns the rights to it. There was a point in time where
different people didn’t want you to sample. There was a time Anita Baker
didn’t want anybody to touch her stuff. George Benson didn’t want anybody to
touch their stuff. [Steely Dan didn’t want anybody to touch the stuff, but he
didn’t realize we touched his stuff. That’s how obscure we were doing things
as well. He didn’t realize that we used his record, but we made it clear
because at the same time, we’re a fan of the people that we sampled from. A
lot of that music, we truly are into. We grew up on that. To want to give the
proper credit, that’s something we aspired to do. But by the label not doing
their just, we get hit with the legalities. At the end of the day, everybody
liked the fact that you’re a fan, but business is business.
COGNITO: 
What was it like the day you met George Clinton?
Maseo 
Oh, another milestone. One of my heroes in music. I’m a big Parliament Funkadelic fan. I went to the concert in 1976. My uncle and my mom took me and
my brother to watch the mothership land at Madison Square Garden. Twenty years
later, I’m in Central Park re-landing the mothership with George Clinton. It’s
amazing, and I had broken my leg that year. It’s like, “I’m going to that
show. I’m going to be on that stage, and I’m going to be part of landing that
mothership,” because to be at that concert when I was six-years-old and then
to turn around when I was 26, to be actually invited to be a part of that, it
was great. George became a really good friend. That’s Uncle George, straight
up. He and I, like, a lot of good times. I won’t smoke no weed with him though.
[laughs] You don’t know what’s in the blunt.
[laughter]
COGNITO 
Sho’nuff, sho’nuff.
Maseo 
He had the nerve to look at me and say, “You young bloods need to stop smoking
that chronic. That shit’s too strong.” I was like, “Are you serious?”
[laughs] That’s a true story, I’m telling you. When we did the
Frank151 thing, and I was talking to him, aw man,
he said, “You and Snoop, you all need to stop this shit here. This shit is too
strong.” I was like, “Are you serious? All the shit you do?” [laughs] “They
didn’t had it like this back in our day.” I was like, “I get you, I feel you.
I’m not messing with you in your day. You own that day, we own this day, and
that’s our separation right there.” [laughs]
COGNITO 
Ooh, man. On the production tip, man, once again you kind of have a similar
story and situation like Ali. Back in them days, a lot with the group efforts,
looking at production-wise, we wouldn’t have known who actually produced
certain cuts because maybe how Ali was saying that you were trying to make the
brand stand out in that sense.
Maseo 
Yeah, I concur with Shah on that. The common goal was to be a group, and to do
everything to kind of poke the group. I don’t know if it’s like that for Shah,
but that was something I noticed Jay doing with Run DMC, although the group
was Run DMC, and Jam Master Jay, but he represented Run DMC, and to even hear
them even turn around and address Run DMC, the brand, the name, more as a
group instead of just two rappers, Run and D. They addressed it more as a
group. That still stands today, because here it is, Jay’s not here, and Run
DMC is not here, and that was a conscious decision and effort on their end to
dissolve the group, because their main man, who they felt held it together, is
not here. The common goal was to be that. There was no hidden agenda. There
was no, “I’m trying to do a solo thing. No disrespect, but it wasn’t a Brand
Nubian situation. All of those guys initially looked to do solo efforts but
then came together to do a group. We know [Grand] Puba come from other
situations. He come from Masters of Ceremony, so different thing. The common
goal was to be a group, always to be a group, and that still is the goal.
COGNITO 
It’s an incredible testament with y’all, and in my opinion, I say this because
you all are clearly out of all the groups in hip hop from that era, y’all are
undefeated. Like, every album has been incredible. You all are what? Twenty-three years high and rising now? Never broke up.
Maseo 
Something like that.
COGNITO 
Never broke up, and no one’s ever pursued solo situations. You remained a
group, and that’s something that needs to be…
Maseo 
It’s not a fairy tale. It’s a gift and curse. I call it the gift and curse,
because something that is you recognize to be so great, it’s really hard to
pull together. Not everybody’s on the same page at the same time, especially
when you know your role and people around you look at it to be powerful, but
in some respects I’m powerless because I can’t rap for him. I can’t rap for
him. I can’t make him like a certain beat. I don’t know when the stars are
lining up for him today to want to make music, so I got to be patient. And
then being patient, yeah, the clock of business is ticking, because now our
childhood dream is a full-fledged career, and we can’t really operate like this
anymore. That’s the curse. That’s the true curse, but when it finally
connects, and if you notice, De La, come on, we don’t put out records as
consistent. You’re dealing with true artists. You can’t rush art. If the
painting ain’t right, you can’t put it out yet. There’s something missing.
Don’t quite know what that is, but when it hits me, I’m going to put it up
there, and then I’m going to put it out. Not quite comfortable with it, so I
don’t care what deadline the corporation has. Trust me, I could sit here and
be a hypocrite to what I’m saying, because I understand the duality of the
relationship. There’s music business, and then there’s music art, and I’m
playing both sides of the fence. As the one in the group who had way more
responsibilities than everybody else, I’m like, “We got to get this paper,
man!” [laughs] You just can’t rush the art, so when it comes down to it, the
ultimate curse is that you’ve got to wait for the art to be solidified, and
not everybody’s on the same page, so it’s that waiting process. You just
continue to pursue the magic.
COGNITO 
That’s a nice way to segue into this next cut that you happened to produce.
(music: De La Soul – “Ego Trippin’ (Part
Two)” / applause)
Maseo 
Salutations. Salutations. Salutations.
COGNITO 
That was a sure-shot banger right there, and shameless plug, thank you all for
reppin’ OG Fro t-shirt in that video. [shakes hands with Maseo]
Maseo 
It was hot, man.
COGNITO 
Got to set it off, you know what I’m saying? Respect, you know? You have such
a character about you that we kind of got to live out through a lot of these
albums, and then you had your time when you started to do your own thing. You
started an independent record label, Bear Mountain, and what was it about that
time in your life that made you realize that it was time to take another
creative endeavor helping other artists, which y’all seemed to already do
anyways because you all put us on to so many different artists, from the Mos
Def’s to being on “Buddy” with Latifah and Monie Love?
Maseo 
I’ll go fight for the part of A Tribe Called Quest. First record he rapped on
was “Buddy Remix” so those are just other blessings again. These people coming
into your life, God presenting these people in your life, and you develop
something with them. For me, definitely getting past the third album,
definitely tainted with the business. My innocence is gone. Not really all
that inspired. The true inspiration always came out of who was fresh and new
and never embarked upon the business, that one cat, two cats who just real hot
and got a dream. The one thing Paul said to me a long time ago, especially for
where I come from, I love what I do because I could’ve literally been a
stickup kid. I was pretty good at the streets. I was pretty good. I think I
knew whatever I put my mind to, I would be good at. That’s just truly it. New
York life presents such a hustle, especially when you come from a single-
parent home and your moms is on and off welfare, we dealing with the warranted
struggles. I’m the oldest child, and I’m trying to figure out how to help my
moms out. I could’ve been that cat. I could’ve been that cat on America’s
Most Gangsta, Best Gangsters. I could’ve been that for real deal. But God
pushed me a different place. First of all, I love my mother to death. I never
wanted to disappoint her. Although what I did in the streets, I tried to make
sure she never found out. When I was getting too heavy with it, I would tell
her. That would be my moment of repent. Really, to answer your question, Paul
put me on, man. Big up to Prince Paul all day.
[applause]
If it hadn’t been for my relationship with Paul, I could’ve been somewhere
else. I asked Paul, “What could I ever really do to repay you?” He said, “Two
things.” He said, “Yo, have some experiences that I never had with this hip
hop thing. And then two, turn around and do the same thing for somebody else
that I’m doing for you.”
[applause]
COGNITO 
Word up. Word up. Like Ali and Tribe, y’all also had experience with J Dilla.
Maseo 
He’s a true king, for real.
COGNITO 
Since this is Dilla month, and y’all are going to rock in his honor tonight at
Boombox, why don’t you speak on Dilla? What was that meeting like? How did
that come about?
Maseo 
J Dilla, I think we all met him around the same time. If I can really recall,
I think Dave was the first to meet him but introduced him to Q-Tip. They met
in the malls in Detroit somewhere. I think Dilla had already been working with
Pharcyde at this point, though, and he was still an unknown, but he was
working with Pharcyde because he was putting his name down as Jay Dee, not
Dilla, so you could get it confused with Jermaine Dupree.
COGNITO 
Not really, but yeah.
[laughter]
Maseo 
At that point in time, if you really didn’t know, because you would be like,
“Yo, same dude that produced Kriss Kross?”
[laughter]
COGNITO 
Pre-Wikipedia.
Maseo 
[laughs]Yeah. Pre-Wikipedia, like Cliff Notes. [laughs] Really, meeting
him and connecting, my first time really chilling with Dilla, like having my
real moment when we smoked out and we kicked it, because when we’re around my
crew and we’re around Tribe, it’s like with the pastors of church sometimes.
[laughs] Sometimes. You know, we never really got loose. The studio
atmosphere has always been a real… That’s our playground. That’s where we
really take the work serious. Everybody’s truly into the art, but I got to go
to the crib a few times and hang out with him in his own world. After an
okayplayer show or any time I came to the
D[etroit], hung out with Fran-N-Dank, and we really kicked it, man. A lot of
times, man, when you get with people you really love and you care for,
everything ain’t always good, so you want to… There’s times you want to let it
out, man. He wanted to tell his Q-Tip story. I wanted to tell my De La story.
There’s times when we got with Ali, we done sat in the car many days and many
nights and shared our bad stories of our camps. That’s just your moment to
vent, and you know when you built family with somebody, you can share this
moment, and they know what you’re saying. You don’t mean no malice who you’re
talking about. You’re just venting, and you’re venting out of love because you
want to continue what you’re doing and who you’re doing it with, but there’s
that moment… Every family fights, man. It’s truly what it is. This is not no
fairy tale. We truly are family. You can see in the Tribe movie. You can
honestly see that. For some reason with the Tribe, I’ve been in the middle of
every fight. I don’t know why me. [laughs]
Ali Shaheed 
[inauadible]
Maseo 
Peace. Peace. [laughs] Want love. Peace, appreciate it. That’s family for
you, and my moment with Jay Dee, it was with Jay Dee and Frank-N-Dank, and
here it is Jay Dee, this was the one moment he really wanted to vent, like
bark a little bit. I’m like, “Yo, B, I’m going to help you find your tongue
because you think I ain’t going to really feel you on this.” I dropped
everything he was feeling, what was going on in the Tribe situation with
Q-Tip, and he kept looking back to Frank-N-Dank going, “Do you hear this
n---er? Do you hear him! Preach! Preach, Mase, please preach! You telling my
soul right now.” I was like, “Let’s smoke out, and let’s just let it out, B,
you know what I’m saying? Only way you going to be able to continue to be
inspired and do what you do and do it with who you love doing it, you got to
get that off your chest.” It’s a cliché, but you got to keep it real. It’s a
true cliché, but you got to keep it real, not only with your folks but with
yourself, because you not going to move forward. He still is great because
he’s been able to be real with himself and real with the situations around
him. I think in our final days of Dilla and hearing him talk, we all felt
that. We all felt that interview on that tape. We felt that, and it was true.
It was honest, man, and he’s the greatest, man. He brought something to hip
hop, and that’s the thing about this. I get upset when I see cats constantly
just taking from it. Taking, taking, taking, taking and give nothing back. Yo,
he gave something to hip hop in a major way, and he definitely helped carry De
La Soul past the tradition of “By the time you make your third album, your
career’s going to be over.” Well, he helped us beat the odds.
[applause]
COGNITO 
Word up. You’re good at this, man. It’s a good segue.
(music: De La Soul – “Stakes Is High” / applause)
COGNITO 
Y’all will get enough of that tonight at Boombox, you know what I’m saying?
You’ll get enough of that tonight at Boombox.
Maseo 
I don’t know if Ali got that in his set, but it’s in mine. [laughs]
COGNITO 
Word, word. Yeah, man, what’s driving you now creatively?
Maseo 
Always the new talent. The new talent always drives me. I like the innocence.
This is something that just happened just yesterday. I met Mac Miller
yesterday for the first time, and I’ve been watching this kid. Actually, my
sons put me onto Mac Miller. My 19-year-old and my 14-year-old put me on to
Mac Miller. They was like, “Daddy, you going to like him.” They’re into the
Lil Wayne’s and all of that, and they definitely into modern-day hip hop, but
by being around me, their understanding is getting a lot more broader. My 19
-year-old has truly matured. He went from Lil Wayne being his favorite rapper
to now Lil Wayne and Big Daddy Kane is his favorite rapper. Busta [Rhymes] got
a spot with him too, like something about Busta, my 19-year-old really loves
him. He’s been loving Busta since he was like eight. Yeah, these new talent,
man. New talent has always been the drive for me from the days of Mos [Def],
from the days of Black Sheep, from everybody that was fresh that came through.
We always challenged the creative envelope. Check your ego at the door, and
let’s really do what we do. If I want to continue to be Maseo out here, how
everybody perceives me, well, Vincent Mason got to come up in here and really do
his job along with Kelvin Mercer and David Jolicoeur and Kamaal Fareed and
everybody else. We check our egos at the door, and we really get down to
challenging each other creatively and not canceling out no idea. Every idea is
a great idea. You have to try it. You don’t know until you’ve really tried it,
and do not cancel it out until you actually put it up there to go, “Okay, it
looks good or it sounds good, or it sounds bad.” You’ve got to put it up.
You’ve got to put it out there. It’s more than just verbally conveying,
because not everybody can see what you saying, so you have to show it, and we
all gave ourselves that respect. That’s what I always liked about our creative
space, but like I say again, the new talent. The new talent drives the hell
out of me. That innocence, man.
COGNITO 
I also wanted to touch that the collaboration that you all did with the
Gorillaz. You didn’t really say much, but it carries that song.
Maseo 
That’s God. Again.
COGNITO 
We’ve heard that laugh.
Maseo 
This laugh is my laugh, and I used to get teased for it. I got a lot fights
behind this laugh, seriously. It’s me, so I learned to embrace it. I can’t
change who I am, and I’m not trying to, but I think in them teenage years,
you’re self-conscious about a lot, so I pound a lot of people upside their
head for this laugh. I love the impression it has on people. I like making
people happy, man, so if my silliness brings joy, cool, because I like being
silly. I like being fun. I like telling jokes. Honestly, I really am a
jokester. My comedy comes free, because if you got to pay for it, it ain’t
funny. [laughs] That’s just my natural, just me being me, the class clown,
but I got my grades. That was my way of playing possum to everybody because I
believe we all can have a good time with what we love to do. 90% of the world
is doing something they hate doing for a living. They never even went to
school for what they’re doing for a living, and I’m part of the 10%. I’m going
to do my best to bring joy to the 90% that hate what they’re doing.
[applause]
COGNITO 
We come to that point where we’re going to open up the floor for questions.
Let’s see.
Audience member 
Hey, Mase.
Maseo 
Hey, Asia.
Audience member 
How you doing?
Maseo
How you doing?
Audience member 
I have a question I’ve always wanted to ask you. You mention that Dilla’s
music was stolen, and we all know that a lot of people will take and not
really give, and he only really became a legend after he passed. What can we
do to commemorate artists so that we don’t have to wait until they pass in
order to make them of legendary status?
Maseo 
We have to support them while they’re here. We have to. There’s no other way
to put it. We have to give them the glory while they’re on this earth. Why do
we acknowledge them when they’re dead and gone? I can never understand that
myself. We definitely need to give them the glory when they’re here on this
earth, when they’re doing tremendous work. But for some reason, we take that
for granted. For some reason jealousy and envy prevails when a person is
alive, but when they finally die, then we have this sentiment, and then we
want to merit them. We live in a world that’s controlled by the devil. The
earth is controlled by the devil. He’s just as strong as the Creator. They’re
brothers, man. He’ll put these weary moments around you every now and again.
When Dilla was alive, I witnessed a lot of envious people, and I feel like
envy is worse than jealousy because you can never really detect it until the
very last moment, and it’s too late. There was a lot of people really envious
of him because he’s just that good and that great. If you know your Bible,
Jesus was great, but he had to go somewhere else to receive his greatness and
then come back for his people to acknowledge his greatness. Dilla had to go to
the spiritual realm for us to acknowledge his greatness. I’m glad I was able
to be a part of the disciples to acknowledge it while he was here on earth.
I’m down by law. [laughs]
[applause]
Audience member 
Salute.
Maseo 
Salute. Saluterie. Salutations.
Audience member 
So Maseo, I grew up listening to De La Soul, KDAY. I remember listening to you
guys on KDAY when I was in high school. Yeah, 1580 KDAY AM, so Craig Mack, the
Mixmasters, and all that stuff. Do you remember when you first heard that you
guys were playing over here in LA on the West Coast, and what is your first
show that you performed here in LA?
Maseo 
My first show in LA was some skating rink. I can’t remember the name of it.
Audience Member
World on Wheels!
Maseo 
World on Wheels! Word up. Word up. All I got to say is I was scared like a
mother because it was gangbanger city, B. Crips and Bloods all day. Yo, for
real. I mean, gang culture then really grew mainstream. It’s crazy. Gang
culture grew really mainstream. Here it is in New York, we didn’t have that at
the time. We have that now. It wasn’t called gangs. It was called your crew.
That word extended pretty dynamic. You could’ve been thugged out. You could’ve
been a rap group. You could’ve been a crew of dancers. But out here, it was
really gangs, for real. One thing I noticed with “gangs” on the East Coast,
especially New York primarily, crews would thug out for money, right? They
would rob you. It was about economics. If I’m going to hurt somebody, I got to
get something out of it. I’m really going to go in to cash this check on this
person. Out here? “No, I’m going to kill for my set. I’m going to blow your
head off because you don’t speak like me. What set you claim? Huh?” What? I
didn’t understand any of that really, and having on the wrong color. That
threw me off. I believe my ignorance is what saved me at the time, truly,
because it was hardcore gangbanging back then. Seriously, I was scared coming
out to LA. I’m glad I made friends with the Boo-Yaa
T.R.I.B.E. early. Word up.
[laughter]
Yo, for real, when I come out, they think I’m Samoan or something like that
anyway, so I made friends with the Boo-Yaa T.R.I.B.E early in the game.
COGNITO 
Y’all used to wear a lot of crazy colors.
Maseo 
Yeah, we wore the colors and the medallion, so I was right in. Boo-Yaa used to
hold me down every time, seriously. “Mase in town! Word!” [laughs]
COGNITO 
Who’s got the mic?
Audience member 
Yeah. Yeah, first I want to say, thanks for De La for being themselves,
creating their own language in the hip hop game, but I’ve got a question about
Long Island as far as groups, MCs that came out. Who originated the first, I
guess you could say “Long Island flow?” To my knowledge, it’s like JVC Force,
EPMD, so…
Maseo 
There’s no real Long Island flow. There’s no real Long Island flow because,
come on, Chuck D from
Long Island. None of us sound like him? So I don’t know what that is. One
thing I can credit Long Island for is rappers using their real names. Erick
Sermon, Parrish Smith, Keith Murray, Craig Mack. You know what I’m saying?
Seriously, unless you was a 5%er like Rakim, you know what I mean? Everybody
did use their real names for the most part. Curt Cazal, Curtis, you know what
I mean, from JVC Force. I don’t know what the Long Island flow is, though, you
got me on that one.
Audience member 
[inaudible]
Maseo 
Okay. You from Long Island?
Audience member 
[inaudible]
Maseo 
Okay, I’m sorry. I don’t know what the Long Island Flow is.
COGNITO 
Oh, there we go.
Audience member 
Yo, I wanted to talk about the song “Buddy.” I know Puffy came along later
talking about how they invented the remix, but if I’m correct, I think “Buddy”
was one of the first remixes that was ever done.
Maseo 
Actually, the first real remix in hip hop was “Me, Myself and I.” It was
completely different music all together from the original, not like a dub of
“The Bridge.” Marley did “The Bridge Is Over.” It wasn’t like a dub mix. It
was an actual remix where the music was completely different. I know Puffy
likes to take credit for that. That’s all for the cameras and for the press,
but people in hip hop know what it really is, and he’s in hip hop, and he
knows what it really is.
Audience member 
Can you explain “Buddy,” because I know Prince Paul said something else in
that video, but it didn’t correlate to what “Buddy” sounded like in the song?
Maseo 
It’s another way of saying “My friend, my dear friend, my close friend, my
friend to the end.” My loved one. Someone you spending special time with.
COGNITO 
My boo.
Maseo 
Yeah, my boo-boo. [laughs] Peace, thank you, man. Thanks. You know what?
Method Man likes the original. That really touched me, man, where he was like,
“I like the original ‘Buddy.’“ I was like, “I did that.” [laughs] Peace,
thank you, man.
Audience member 
Speaking of Method Man, I just wanted to know how the Redman track “Ooh” came
along. How did that come about actually?
Maseo 
Everybody that we worked with, especially after, I got to say, I give it to my
guys on a lyrical tip, and us collectively, when we think about people want to
work with, when the lyrics start to come together and add that extra added
instrument. The vocal has always been another instrument to us. The cadence,
the melody of the vocal, and then also who else you hear on the track, that’s
how we always built our collaborations. We didn’t say we going to really
consciously work with this person. Of course, you want to work with everybody,
but sometimes it just don’t come together like that. [points in the
audience] I’ve been wanting to work with Raphael [Saadiq] for years, but it’s
about the right song, right track, especially when you truly care about your
art. I want to make a record that’s going to compliment us both and create
something completely new for us and Redman or whoever that person may be. Our
styles coming together to create a whole new style. It’s not just about a
feature. It’s truly about doing a collaboration and bringing everybody in the
creative fold. When you call somebody like Redman, he’s thrown off because
he’s like, “De La, thinking of me?” Everybody looked to meet the challenge,
especially if you really… it’s an unspoken. If you’re into hip hop like you
say you’re into hip hop, you’re going to meet certain challenges. Redman met
the challenge. Busta met the challenge. It was definitely a natural think.
Slick Rick, that was the most incredible, I felt, record we made. I didn’t
know how we were going to do that. I always felt like Ricky was going to
outshine us out the door, but it came together. Even the turnaround to make a
record with B-Real. How we going to do that? It’s just going to be Mase and
B-Real, because they the only ones that smoke weed, but the concept came
together. The concept was so ill. Us - myself and B-Real - trying to get Pos
to smoke weed who never smoked weed, and calling the song “Peer
Pressure.” We’re as comedic at
one point; the dual message. The dual message, “You don’t have to smoke weed
to be cool,” and then, “Everybody who smoke weed ain’t bad people or stupid.”
By having Maseo and B-Real and Posdnuos brings a certain message to weed
smoking and the person who chooses not to smoke weed. It was very comedic and
hip hop at the same time, and a true, true, true collaboration, not a feature.
“De La featuring B-Real” and it’s just some bullshit he kicks a 16 and it’s
over.
Audience member 
Hi Maseo. I’m hoping this is a yes, because I saw that you guys did a Nike
couple of tracks a couple of years ago, and it really got me pumped up for
another De La Soul album. I’m hoping that you say yes. Is there another De La
Soul album in the making?
Maseo 
Absolutely, man. Absolutely.
[applause]
You going to see a lot of cool stuff going down. A lot of cool stuff going on.
Right now, the fellows is moving along with this project presented by these
French cats as a concept album called First
Serve. They play these two weird
characters. I forgot the name of Dave’s character, but Pos’s character is
called Deen Witter, and I like his character because he’s totally out of
character being this character. He’s playing somebody who’s supposed to be a
degenerate, pretty much a fuck-up, smoking weed, wearing a smoking jacket and
the do-rag. It looks bugged out. Dave look like a broke-ass Rick Ross. It’s
funny as hell. It’s funny. It’s funny. The project is called First Serve. It’s
funny, man. I don’t want anybody to assume that it’s a De La Soul record and
be disappointed. You really got to check out the concept of the whole project,
check out the visuals, the credits. It’s funny as hell, man. I’m working on a
project called DJ Conductor, where I’m producing new artists and my friends
that I’ve been wanting to work with for the longest. I got a song with KRS-1.
I’ve got to song with Freddie Foxxx. I’ve got a song with Mac Miller, a song
with Fashawn, a couple of cats that I’m inspired by, and finally doing
something that I’ve been needing to do for a long time. Then, you’re going to
see us, of course, make a De La album. We’re going to also make a De La album
with Prince Paul.
[applause]
A lot is going down. A lot of good stuff is brewing. I’m in a good place where
things are. I’m glad the Internet did what it did to the record business, so
the strong will survive. It’s going to show the true testament who’s down for
this music and who’s not down for it, because the checks aren’t there like
they used to be. We’ve got to work that much harder for the check. I love what
I do, so I’ve always worked hard. The error of the big checks, I wasn’t really
catching them anyway. [laughs] I didn’t miss anything. I’m still able to do
what I love to do and catch what I’m catching. I like my place in it. I love
where things are at with the Internet and things being independent again. It’s
going full circle. I was with Tommy Boy when they were independent, and then
they went major. Now they’re back to being independent again, and everybody’s
independent.
