Their name says it all: Masters At Work. “Little” Louie Vega and Kenny “Dope” Gonzalez have spent more than 20 years together, shepherding dance music down new paths with their inventive production style and imaginative feel for different musical forms. Synonymous with the rise and peak of New York City house music, Kenny Dope and Louie Vega met through their mutual friend Todd Terry, resulting in a fruitful production partnership full of timeless hits. With remixes being their specialty, the Masters At Work treatment has been given to a diverse roster of artists: from Madonna, Debbie Gibson, and Lisa Stansfield to Saint Etienne, Michael Jackson, Brand New Heavies, and about 800 other artists. They defiantly mix everything they can find – house, hip-hop, funk, disco, Latin, African and jazz – into a universal groove.
In a 2012 session that was part of Red Bull Music Academy’s “New York City To The SF Bay” lecture series in San Francisco, the two dancefloor dons discussed growing up in New York, their early DJ sets, their work as Nuyorican Soul, and more.
Shawn Reynaldo 
What is exciting is the gentlemen seated next to me, who are basically, if we are talking about dance music or even beyond that, in New York City; these two guys are some of the most influential and legendary figures of the past 20 years, in fact we’re pretty much at the 20th anniversary of when they started putting out music. So let’s welcome Kenny Dope and Little Louie Vega, Masters at Work. 
[applause] 
I want to start off not at the beginning, but with something kind of basic:
The name “Masters at Work” is kind of a ballsy choice. I mean, especially when you
guys were just you know, putting out records at first. Can you talk a little bit about
where the name came from?
Kenny Dope 
Basically, Masters at Work goes back to my childhood days in Brooklyn, 1984,
1985. It was my old crew, and basically we did parties, neighborhood parties. That’s
basically where it started from. After that, Todd Terry used to come to the
parties, who was another friend, and basically needed the name for a record.
He was like, “You know, I need a title for this joint that I’m putting out.” I
let him use the name. So he did two titles, a song called “Alright, Alright,”
and another joint called “Dum Dum Cry.” So he put those out, they made some
noise. Those were more on the electronic freestyle side of things, 1988. I
started doing records at that point, and Louie was DJing at that time. Todd
would bring Louie reel-to-reels to play at the club, and everything kind of
just snowballed into effect from there. At that point, me putting out records,
Louie was doing his thing. There was a few records that Louie had gotten from
Todd. Louie actually wanted to remix a couple of my records, which never
happened. But we started this company, and we started hanging out. I would go
to his house, he had a drum machine there, we would mess around, and then that
was basically the birth of Masters at Work, the production team, like late
’89, early 1990.
Shawn Reynaldo 
So, we’ll talk a lot about Masters at Work, and what you guys have put out. But
let’s scale it back a little bit. I want to talk about New York City, just
because obviously, that’s where the Red Bull Music Academy is going to be this
year, and that’s where you both grew up. Can you talk about, what was it like
growing up in New York City in the ‘70s and then in the ‘80s, musically,
culturally, and how did that affect what you guys eventually started doing
with DJing and production?
Kenny Dope 
Being in New York, actually, being in Brooklyn, I was surrounded by a lot of
different styles of music. I’m from Sunset Park, which was primarily Puerto
Rican. Next to me, I had Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, which is all Italian. Further
up, it was a Jewish area. To my left, it was African-American, Jamaican. So I was
in the middle of all of that. So I had reggae on one side, I had Italian stuff
on the other, electro and alternative stuff, rock, and then my area. Growing
up to all of that, that’s where I learned about breaks, and learned about
different styles of music. And then being Puerto Rican, my pop, all he played was Latin
music, which I hated as a kid. I was just like, “That’s my parents’ music, and
the old-folk music.” Later on, as I got into production, and started to
understand music as a whole, I got into it, and the arrangements and all that
kind of stuff.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Louie, you came from a musical family, correct?
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah, I was born in the Bronx, and I was raised on Stratford Avenue, which is
right at the heart of where hip-hop was born. Right down the block was Bronx
River Projects, and there was Afrika Bambaataa, Jazzy Jay, Red Alert, Afrika Islam. Actually, Jazzy Jay was the first known DJ that I knew, just a very
famous DJ, that took me under his wing when I was a kid. At the same time, I
had an uncle who was a very famous salsa singer. His name was Hector Lavoe. He
was on Fania Records, and he was one of the Fania All-Stars. I would see him
walking in my house at like four in the morning, and bring in a little test
pressing of a 45 of one of his records that became a huge hit in the next six
months. So that was in the family all the time. And my father played sax, and he
listened to a lot of Miles Davis, John Coltrane, and he played jazz and also
in a lot of the Latin local bands, and Latin jazz bands. And my sisters were disco
queens. They went to Studio 54, The Loft, Paradise Garage. They used to go out
with a lot of dudes in gangs that were DJs. So they would bring home all this
music I never heard on the radio. I grew up listening to anything from Elton
John to Steely Dan to Stevie Wonder, Quincy Jones and all that. A lot of pop
music at the time. And I heard all this great dance music, that wasn’t the disco
music that was on the radio, it was this other style, and I was like, “What is
this fusion?” It ended up being loads of the classics that we play today, a
lot of records you only heard in places like The Loft or the Paradise Garage.
The combination of all those things, I guess, has been reflecting on me all
these years.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Did you start going to those things as well, once you got old enough? Did your
sisters let you tag along to the clubs?
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah, first of all, when I was a kid, I used to be in the car dropping them
off in the front of the club. Imagine, you see this chaos, like 1,000 people
in front of a club trying to get in. You hear the [mimics beat] “Boom-sh, boom-sh” outside,
and then I’ve got to go back home.
[laughter]
I would drop them off, with another person in the car who was driving. It was
a big tease for a long time. I finally got to go in 1980 to the Paradise
Garage. That’s where I first heard Larry Levan, and it just changed up the
whole game. I really wanted to be a club DJ at the time.
Shawn Reynaldo 
When you hear names like Larry Levan, and people talk about Paradise Garage,
they’ve achieved this mythical status. They’re almost terms that people throw around,
that obviously never went there. Since you were there, was it as good as
everyone says? What was a night like at the Paradise Garage, with Larry Levan?
Little Louie Vega 
First, I have to say that I’ve never, ever heard a sound system that can beat
the Paradise Garage. It was an amazing sound system. It was in a room that was
treated… I mean, they took something empty, like this [room], and built the club
within that room, in this big square. You had Larry Levan, who was this
musical genius. He started like all of us. I think he was a light man or
something, and the DJ didn’t show up, and he just started playing. He had a
great taste for music and sound. Then you had Richard Long, who was the
creator of the sound systems that you see that started like a Ministry of
Sound. You’ve got to imagine, in New York City at that time, there were about
20 Ministry of Sounds. Imagine clubs with sound systems like that, and
anywhere you went, the DJs were amazing. They were playing great music, and it
sounded great. But the Paradise Garage became the blueprint, and The Loft,
even before the Paradise Garage because The Loft was in 1970 or whatever. I
wasn’t around at those times; I’d be a little older. My sisters went to those
places. They’re ten years older than me, and I was the little kid, just
watching them and checking things out. The Paradise Garage was a magical
place, the lighting system, the sound… He didn’t even use monitors. I mean,
he didn’t use headphones. He had Bose speakers that were like his headphones.
It was weird, I would never be able to play like that. He wasn’t a super-
technical guy, but he definitely created an atmosphere, and made those records
sound amazing, and knew what to play after what, and… There were no musical
boundaries. He would play something that was influenced by rock, something
that was influenced by jazz, it just went all around the scope. He just had an
open mind for music but was all danceable. That was it. I just saw this
interview, because Lenny Fontana, I don’t know if you guys know, you should
check this out, I think his dad used to work at a radio station or something,
and he recorded some interviews from Larry Levan. When you hear him talk, you
could tell he was definitely way ahead of his time. It definitely was magical.
It was a great time, that’s it. I think today, there’s other good times, and
it’s a world now. It’s not just New York, it’s all around the world. Now you
have kids from around the world making the music that’s inspired by that
sound. It is part of the roots of dance music, and New York in general, with
hip-hop as well.
Shawn Reynaldo 
When you both started DJing, what kind of stuff were you playing initially?
Kenny Dope 
I started playing reggae. I was playing reggae and hip-hop, primarily. That’s
where it started for me. I graduated to actually trying to make beats,
instrumentals to play in my sets. I would record them on reel-to-reel, and
play them at the parties. But at the same time, at that same moment, in ’85,
that’s when house music was introduced to New York. That’s when Marshall Jefferson had “Move Your Body,” and a lot of Trax records coming in from
Chicago. I worked at a record store at that point as well, so I was able to
hear everything that was coming out. At that point, coming up, I learned how
to play a lot of different styles of music, because that’s what people wanted
to hear. At the same time, on the radio, listening to Marley Marl, and
listening to Red Alert, and listening to Chuck Chillout, they played
everything. They would play Prelude records, they would play breakbeat
records, they would play hip-hop, of course. But I came up on the DJ being
able to play a lot of different styles, which is really important. That’s
something that we followed up with. Louie as well, he did the same thing. When
we started with the production, we brought in a lot of different elements as
well. The loud bass, percussions, horns. We just wanted the sound to be more
organic, once we got into it. Initially, when we first came out, we started
doing dubs, because we wanted people to know that we can mess with it, and do
that sound. We were new, together. Louie had a career before that, but I was
the new kid on the block. That was our introduction into the game. I guess
from coming up with all that different music, and then that’s where the Latin
came back. We introduced that as well to it, records that are still being
played today. It can go on and on.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Louie, what about you? What were you spinning?
Little Louie Vega 
That was it. Growing up in New York, you just grew up to different sounds and
different styles. I was playing hip-hop. Remember I said Jazzy Jay took me
under his wing. I was playing, what do you call that, electro, back in the
early ‘80s. I played disco, I played r&b, I played ‘80s electro, reggae. I
think I had a lot to do because from ’85 to ’90 is when I really started
playing in clubs in New York City. I was a mobile DJ was I was 13, helping
out. He had the equipment, I was carrying the records, setting it up, back in
’78. I just worked my way up, little by little. I was like, “Yo, could I
borrow two crates? Could I borrow the turntables and the mixer and one
speaker?” You know, I started like that. I practiced, I just loved what I did, and I
lived it. That was it. In the late ‘70s, I was also a good roller skater. A
lot of my r&b influence comes from my roller skating days. I wouldn’t
roller skate now, though.
[laughter]
I used to go to all the rinks, from like ’78 to ’83, like solid, five days a
week, like heavy. During school and everything.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Were you doing tricks?
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah, tricks. [laughs] Let’s not get into that.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Like, 360s?
Little Louie Vega 
A lot of hip-hop and r&b, and more of the downtempo disco music and all
that, was played in the rinks. I got a lot of schooling from there. I just
learned to play all that music, within a night. From ’85 to ’90, my first club
was The Devil’s Nest up in the Bronx, which was, let’s say the dance club that
the Fever Club owned. Fever Club is where Grandmaster Flash played, Lovebug
Starski, you name it, all the hip-hop legends played there. They wanted to
make a dance club, and I was this new kid, doing all this stuff up in the
Bronx. They heard about me and they were like, “Yo, we want you to play in
this club. We’re going to open up a dance club.” It wasn’t disco at the time,
because it was the tail end of that, and all this new stuff was happening.
When I started in ’85, it became the birth of the freestyle era. It was called
Latin hip-hop music. A lot of music that was made by myself, Andy Panda, Latin
Rascals, Carlos Berrios, that music actually was inspired by music that came
from the Funhouse, where Jellybean played in the early ‘80s. We all went there
as kids, and we heard all these English artists, and even black artists like
Shannon, making a freestyle-type record. All we had access to was all the
Latin girls in the neighborhood. That’s why you hear that music. If you look
up all this Latin hiphop music, you hear a lot of the Latin girls singing.
Some were not such great singers.
[laughter]
We had like three great singers, in the whole scene. [laughs] From ’85 to
’90, I made a lot of that music, but I was still playing hip-hop, reggae,
disco, and then house. I think I had a lot to do with the format. It was in
this open format in New York, that after I left the scene in 1990, when we got
together, it was just too crazy. There was a lot of trouble. You know how it
is in clubs, shoot-outs, everything outside, it got too dangerous, and I
said, “I’ve got to grow up. I’ve got to do something else.” I kinda laid low for a
year and a half. Kenny and I got together, and I just focused with Kenny for a
year and a half solid of working in the studio, and getting accustomed to each
other. I’d have to say that New York is what brought that out of us. All the
DJs that we listened to over the years, just playing all those different
styles of music, which eventually got into our production. We brought that out
in our production.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Why don’t we play a little bit, just for anyone who wants a refresher, or
hasn’t heard it before. You guys’s first single came out in 1991, correct? You
think so? I checked.
Little Louie Vega 
I think as artists, as Masters at Work…
Shawn Reynaldo 
As Masters at Work.
Little Louie Vega 
As Masters at Work, yeah, 1991.
Shawn Reynaldo 
I checked Discogs today. We’re going to play a track.
Kenny Dope 
A lot of records ago. A lot of them.
Shawn Reynaldo 
I looked. In case you guys don’t realize how much output these guys have made,
the remix credit on Discogs is like 872 remixes, which is insane. These are
just a sampling of some of the artists they’ve remixed: Michael Jackson,
Debbie Gibson, Soul II Soul, Bjork, Donna Summer, Janet Jackson, Daft Punk,
Madonna, Keith Sweat, CeCe Peniston, Mr. Fingers, Lil Louis. That’s just a
tiny fraction.
Kenny Dope 
You know what’s crazy about that is? For the amount of records that came out,
there’s about double the amount that didn’t come out. They were just like,
“Nah, we’re not putting that out.” We’re like, “OK.”
Little Louie Vega 
Every time we worked on tracks, for each of those remixes, there were two or
three bodies of music done; different, complete tracks for that artist. We
would use the one for the artist, and then we had these other ones that are
hidden there; some that we don’t even know about, that we have to go look back
in the archives and pull out.
Kenny Dope 
And during that time, we each had solo careers. So, doing the mixes together, then we
had records separate. It’s got to be in the three thousands, easy… Somewhere
up there.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Let’s hear a little bit of this. This is, I believe, from your first 12”. I’m
going to play a song called “Justa Lil’ Dope.” You guys, I hope you know this
record.
(music: Masters At Work – “Justa Lil Dope”)
Obviously, you guys are most closely associated with house music, but this is
kind of like a hip-hop vibe.
Kenny Dope 
What’s crazy is at that point, Louie wanted some records like to segue into
what he was doing at the club. If I remember correctly, there was some samples
that he wanted in there. Schoolly D had just come out, and it was just me, just
putting samples together, just to segue in there. It ended up to be a record.
Little Louie Vega 
You can hear a lot of the influences there. At that point, I was playing hip-hop, reggae, and then the other styles. I always told Kenny that I felt that
we played hip-hop or reggae, but we wanted to mix hip-hop with reggae. I was
like, “Kenny, I want you to mix hip-hop with reggae. We’ve got to just take
all these records that I’m playing right now…” And those are all the records I
was playing. You guys can recognize some of them, if you’re DJs from… No? [laughs] Those were some popular reggae records at the time. Schoolly D, of course, and that sax… where’s that sax from?
Kenny Dope 
Lafayette Afro Rock Band.
Little Louie Vega 
There you go. A lot of those records we were playing at the time, and there
was really no records that were reggae and hip-hop together. We was playing
this reggae records and we was playing these hip-hop records and I wanted him
to combine it. I thought that was a pretty cool combination of all those elements.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Speaking of sampling, I’m going to put on another track, which has maybe one
of the most unusual samples. I think you’ll know what I’m talking about, when
I play it. It’s called “The Ha Dance.” It was from the same year, 1991.
(music: Masters At Work – “The Ha Dance”)
Kenny Dope 
That’s actually from Trading Places.
[applause]
Shawn Reynaldo 
Do you guys know that movie? How did you think to sample that, and put it on a house record?
Kenny Dope 
I have no idea.
[laughter]
I can’t even tell you. And it’s crazy, I was just telling Louie, I was like,
“That’s the voguing anthem. They go in on that.”
Little Louie Vega 
It’s crazy how that record is a huge voguing record.
Kenny Dope 
It’s crazy.
Little Louie Vega 
There’s this dance in the gay scene, and it’s crazy how they dance to that. At
the same time, in those days, it was great because the hip-hop crowd and the
house crowd were as one. They would be in one club. We have what, in the
Roseland, like 2,500, 3,000 people… You hear these elements, we were making
these records from that influence, and getting inspired from the crowd. It was
together. I wish it was like that today, but it was an amazing time. Everybody
was into the music that was out, whether it was house, or whether it was hip
hop. A person who liked house, liked hip-hop. A person who liked hip-hop,
liked house. We were bridging those gaps. We were bridging that music, with
records like that.
Kenny Dope 
I just loved the fact that it was able to touch so many different people. A
song like that, that was done in a couple hours, can touch so many different
people, in so many different styles.
Shawn Reynaldo 
You guys made that in a couple hours?
Kenny Dope 
Probably, like two hours.
[laughter]
Maybe less than that.
Shawn Reynaldo 
I don’t think it’s fair. You guys are just too talented.
Little Louie Vega 
That was a time when Kenny said that we used to go to each other’s places. I
lived in the Bronx, and he lived in Brooklyn, which was maybe 50 minutes away,
an hour away from each other. So, we would take some time, and I would go to his
place. We would talk about music, sample some records, come up with some
tracks. He would come to my place, we would do the same. At that time, Kenny
brought me this track and I said it was crazy. In those days, we would play
off of a reel-to-reel, when you didn’t have a record out yet. Imagine this
technique, quarter-inch reel-to-reel. It had a pitch control. I used to spin
it, hit the “Play” button, and just pitch it right in and mix it on top of the
other records. Kenny brought me this on a reel and I said, “Yo, we’ve got to
make this the first single.” It was our first time coming out as Masters at
Work. On the other side, we put another song called “Blood Vibes,” which also
brought in hip-hop and reggae together. We wanted to put something for both
crowds, or whether you liked any kind of music, you would like something from
our single. That’s why we started putting something that was hip-hop or reggae
influenced on one side, and on the other side, a house anthem.
Kenny Dope 
The label loved it, too, because it was double the sales. Because the hip-hop
DJs bought two [copies] to cut, and the house DJs bought it for the other
side. They were happy.
Little Louie Vega 
In those days, you could sell about 100,000 to 150,000 pieces of vinyl, of a
record like that.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Which is crazy, because now it’s like people are putting out 12”s and it’ll be
like 500, 1,000, or something like that. I want to ask a little bit more
about, you guys got involved pretty heavily in the house scene in the early to
mid-‘90s, and were turning out all these remixes. Major labels were putting
out house music and stuff like that. What was that era like? I feel like now,
in a way, it’s like the scene is bigger, but the industry for it is so much
more specialized. Were you guys tied in to the mainstream music industry?
Kenny Dope 
Right now, I do r&b stuff, so on that side, yes. But on the house side,
no. I actually think, if you really listen to what’s going on in the urban
scene, there’s a lot of records that are house records, that are being played
right now, that are big records. You’ve got Timbaland’s, you’ve got a lot of
guys that actually studied house, and studied us, and have taken that style
and created it for the newer artists. Going back to your original question,
yeah, it was crazy when you had Epic Records, and you had Warner Brothers and
Atlantic. We did a big body of work for a long time. Every artist that they
had coming through there, they wanted us to touch. And we were very selective,
believe it or not, for those 873 titles that you came up with. We turned down
a lot of stuff, too, because there had to be something in the song, that we
could relate to, or get an idea for. There was tons of remixers that did
everything that came in the door. That’s why they got fizzled out, pretty much.
We kept it true to what we do, we learned more as we went on, we expanded our
sound, we tried different sounds… Like I said before, we tried to bring in
different elements to the music that wasn’t there. There was guys that were
just doing drums, bass, they were sampling the vocal a little bit, and that
was the mix. We brought instrumentation in. We brought live strings into the
whole thing. Like I said, guitars, and a lot of different instruments into it.
I think we took it pretty far, musically, I think.
Little Louie Vega 
I think from ’85 to ’90 I was doing a lot of remixes. I was doing more
freestyle and pop. That’s when I had done stuff like Debbie Gibson. She was
like the Britney Spears of that time, put it that way. I used to do a lot of
records that were on the radio. These records were selling 250,000 to half a
million copies. It was crazy. I couldn’t grow anymore with the music that I
was working on. When I got into house music, and Kenny and I started working
in 1990, some of the pop artists were still calling me. I said, “Damn, we
can’t get the artists that can sing on this kind of stuff.” So Kenny and I
thought about this idea; we said, “Let’s make the B-sides of the records, and
let’s put this new style we created on the B-sides of the records, but still
grab a hook from the artist and song.” Maybe their vocal, it could be any
musical hook, something that was really strong, and create these things called
Masters At Work dubs. We did a few of them, and Atlantic Records was one of
the first that really looked out for us. From there, it spread. After we did
Atlantic, we did Epic, we did Warner Brothers. And once we put out a few of
these dubs, they were so big, they were playing them on the radio. Just a dub.
We were even blown away like, “Why are they playing an instrumental on the
radio, or this record with this one little hook?” It was so strong in the
clubs, and at that time, the club music was influencing radio in New York.
Once we did a few of them, then bigger artists started calling. We were like,
“Whoa, OK. Madonna wants one? Serious?” We couldn’t believe everybody wanted
one of those dubs. So we just kept going from there. As we started getting more
artists that we could work with, we began creating songs out of those dubs,
out of that style that we created with these dubs. Our first song that we did
was with an artist that we worked with from New York, and it was [La] India. We did
“I Can’t Get No Sleep.” If you listen to “I Can’t Get No Sleep,” what it
really is, is a Masters At Work dub with a song on it, with her singing, sort
of ad-libbing.
Shawn Reynaldo 
I actually have it. We can play it for people.
Little Louie Vega 
Oh, OK.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Let’s hear what it sounds like.
(music: Masters At Work feat. India – “I Can’t Get No Sleep”)
So those vocal bits at the beginning, you guys basically had taken her vocals and
then chopped them up?
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah, that’s just her. We sampled her vocal. In those days, for the first,
let’s say six years of Masters At Work, it was just Kenny on drum machine and
me on keyboards. That’s what it was. I can hear more of the naiveness in the
music. [laughs] I tried to play my best, but it definitely developed something that a lot
of people liked. I guess that’s what attracted a lot of the young people that
listened at that time. With her vocals, it was really powerful, and this
record really took the world by storm, big time.
Shawn Reynaldo 
I pulled an example basically of how transformative you guys’s remixes were in
those days. Basically, I brought the original, and then I brought your dub.
It’s of Saint Etienne’s “Only Love Can Break Your Heart.” I don’t know if you
guys know. I’m going to play the original first, and you can see what it
sounds like, and we’ll play their dub version, and you’ll see how different…
(music: Saint Etienne – “Only Love Can Break Your Heart”)
(music: Saint Etienne – “Only Love Can Break Your Heart (Masters At Work dub)”)
On a remix like that, how much of the original song is in there?
Kenny Dope 
Just that one, that first line.
[laughter]
That was delayed out, that first little piece.
Little Louie Vega 
You’ve got to imagine, we’re getting songs like the first version you heard.
We were really inspired at that time. We wanted to make that floor rock at a
dance club. It was about getting that right hook. That one hook, it was pretty
strong. You knew where it came from, but then you heard this new track and
you’re like, “Who made that?” It became its own entity. You can tell, it’s its
own thing. A lot of people, and especially in Europe, this is when it started
blowing up in Europe. Everybody wanted to know who these two guys were from
New York. We hadn’t gone there yet together.
Shawn Reynaldo 
During that era, it seems like there was a lot of this going on in New York.
There were artists like MK [Marc Kinchen] and Todd Terry and stuff like that. Was there sort
of a scene of artists? Were you paying attention to what they were doing and
then being like, “Oh, I’ve got to top it”? Were you guys just doing your own
thing?
Little Louie Vega 
We all hung out in the same place. I used to play in a place called the Sound
Factory Bar. It was at the Underground Network parties, and I did that for
five years. That’s where we were all hanging out. Everybody was inspired,
because I would play everybody’s records. I’d play ours, I’d play Todd’s,
MK’s. We never really had the competition thing. A lot of times, we got a
little frustrated because everybody was kind of taking our grooves, at one
point. Another record come out, another remix for somebody, but they would
take our same keyboard line, our same chords, the bassline, the movement, the
beat. A lot of the guys were inspired by us, let’s say. They would just rip
our entire hard work. Getting that we spend time, some things would take two
hours, and some things could take two days. We felt we worked really hard
creating these things, and they were ripped by all kinds of guys out there,
doing their thing. They’d have the bigger artists, and they’d get all the
glory. We were like, “Damn, but it’s all good. We’ll just keep going.” We just
kept doing what we were doing. We just worked hard and always tried to create
something new. And that’s the thing with Kenny and I; I was always like, “Kenny,
just keep coming up with different drum kits, different rhythms, everything.”
I would play keyboards on top of that, and they would create these new grooves
that we had. I think we just tried to keep it fresh. And it was ten years of
that.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Alright, I’ve got to play one more song. It’s hard to pick a biggest song, but I think
this is definitely one of your most influential, and I think it’s one that a
lot of people in here are going to know, and I want to know a little more
about it. It’s called “Deep Inside.”
(music: Masters At Work – “Deep Inside”)
That record came out in 1993, even though it’s a song that you can still hear
at a club today. DJs still drop that one. Did you guys know when you made it,
that it was a big tune?
Kenny Dope 
He was in doubt for a minute. [laughs]
Little Louie Vega 
That song, it was kind of weird, because it was part of another song. There
was a song called “Beautiful People.” The Underground Network, the parties I
used to play at, were hosted by Barbara Tucker and Don Welch. Barbara Tucker
was a singer. I figured, she’s a promoter, we’re in this club. We should just
make a record. We got together, and there was a lot of people involved in
“Beautiful People,” which created part of “Deep Inside” and everything. Of
course, Kenny, India, Lem Springsteen from Mood II Swing, Derek Whitaker;
these were all songwriters. We got together and I played this little groove on
the Rhodes, and they wrote this song on it. When Barbara came in, she was ad-
libbing. I heard this little hook, “Deep Inside.” And that was it. I just sampled
that from the song. It was like a marketing thing in a way. I said, “Let me
introduce her voice to the world, through this track, so they can get used to
her tone and everything, and then put out the song.” It kind of worked,
because the track blew up really big. Actually, that track was done in another
producer’s studio. He’s a DJ, I mean, he was a DJ at the time. He was young.
He wasn’t even doing much. He wanted to get into DJing, so he just really
wanted me to work, badly, in his studio. I said, “Let me go over there and
play some keys and stuff.” That’s when I had the little “Deep Inside” sample,
and I played those keys. He engineered the record, which actually doesn’t
sound as good as when [Kenny and I would have done it], you know? It was
Erick Morillo. Erick Morillo actually engineered that song, and I did it in
his studio. He had a little studio and a little room. This was way back in the
days. Ever since then, we were instrumental in helping him to get his stuff
out on Strictly Rhythm and all that. It’s a small world, you know?
Shawn Reynaldo 
I want to move ahead a little bit. Basically, around the same time, I think it
was in ’93 or so, you guys formed Nuyorican Soul. This is while you guys were
pretty much at the top of your game, in terms of turning out house records and
remixes in Masters At Work. What was the impetus to make the new project?
Kenny Dope 
That came from us being in London, at Southport, which is a Weekender that’s
been going on, what like 25 years? Yeah, like 25 years. At that point, I was
just amazed to go to a party where you had a jazz room, a soul and funk room.
They had the old guys, the old heads, the 60-year-olds had their own room, the
northern soul room, then they had a dance room. You could walk in, and there
was all this music going on at one time. I was in shock at the jazz room, because the
dancers just blew my mind. Everybody was dressed; suits, the women were
dressed in dresses, the men had these tap shoes on. And it was just the dances that they were
doing, just from watching them, made me come up with that rhythm of the beat,
the drum style on “The Nervous Track,” which ended up to be later on broken beat music. Just from seeing them dance, that’s how I came up with that style.
That’s actually the birth of the whole Nuyorican Soul thing.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Why don’t we play that, just to give you guys an idea? This is the first
single they put out under that Nuyorican Soul name. It’s called “The Nervous
Track,” and we’ll give it a little listen.
(music: Nuyorican Soul – “The Nervous Track” / applause)
I feel bad turning it down. It’s a classic tune. I don’t mean this in a
critical way, but it’s almost a little more musical, if you will.
Kenny Dope 
Well at that point, that’s when it was transitioning. We was getting into jazz,
we’d get into more of the Latin stuff. Things were going in that direction at
that point.
Shawn Reynaldo 
As you guys started working on it, because you eventually put on an album, you
kind of assembled a sort of dream team of musicians and artists to come in on
the songs. Can you talk a little bit about some of the people you collaborated
with in Nuyorican Soul?
Kenny Dope 
Yeah, we had George Benson, Tito Puente, rest in peace, Eddie Palmieri. We had
Vince Montana with the Salsoul Orchestra…
Little Louie Vega 
Roy Ayers.
Kenny Dope 
Roy Ayers, Jocelyn Brown… Who else am I missing?
Little Louie Vega 
Dave Valentin.
Kenny Dope 
Yeah, Q-Tip was on the remix of “Black Gold of the Sun,” Dave Valentin. [to audience] What’s
up, homeboy? I just seen you. There was a lot of different artists that we
looked up to as kids, and played their records. We wanted to incorporate a
record with no boundaries, different races, just everybody, all types of
people, to create this project with us. Pretty much, we had this vision for
it, and at that point we wanted to bring in all of our childhood vibes, pretty
much.
Little Louie Vega 
When you hear the track, “The Nervous Track,” we were blown away because we
had people that liked drum&bass, that liked hip-hop. We had like
Funkmaster Flex, Roni Size, Goldie, of course the house scene, everybody
calling us about this track. When we did this track we said, “Wow, this
appeals to everybody.” It’s at the tempo of house, but it’s not. And when we were
creating that song, I remember we were in the studio doing an Ultra Naté remix
for Warner Brothers. When Kenny did that beat I was like, “Dude, we can’t put
that on that remix. It doesn’t go with the vocal. It’s a different thing, man.
It’s a whole new thing.” I started playing those pads, those eerie pads in the
beginning. And I remember, I was all psyched about this old piece called the
Oberheim. [to Kenny] Remember that little Oberheim module?
Kenny Dope 
What? The…
Little Louie Vega 
The Oberheim?
Kenny Dope 
The 1,000? The Matrix?
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah, the Matrix. I was blown away by that, and a lot of the sounds came from
that, actually. When we were bringing a new piece into the studio, it was like
inspiration right away. A lot of our memorable tracks are from when we just
got a new piece or a new keyboard in or something. That track right there, we
even brought in a percussionist, one of Kenny’s friends from the neighborhood.
Because we wanted to keep it real street, so we said, “Let’s not bring in one of the
top percussion dudes. This is one of our boys, to give us a street thing.” He
did a great job on the congas there and everything. Everything else is just
us, keyboards and drum machine. Actually, Kenny sampled, that’s like three or four
drummers, right? Playing at the same time or something.
Kenny Dope 
It’s crazy. It’s actually a drum sessions record. It’s like three different
parts, but that actual main loop is from the left side of the drum sessions.
The drum sessions record is four drummers playing at the same time, throughout
the record. But that main loop happens to come out of the left side. That’s
how that was.
Shawn Reynaldo 
When you guys were working on a track, and trying to get in touch with someone
like George Benson or Roy Ayers or whoever, Tito Puente, was it odd to be
like, “Hey, we’re Masters At Work, we make house music. Tito Puente, do you
want to come play on our record?” Or Roy Ayers, like, was it a natural collaboration?
Did these people know about Masters At Work, or did you have to sell them on
it?
Kenny Dope 
At that period, that we were doing a lot of the major label stuff, we got
approached to do a Tito Puente remix. So we did that for him, he was real cool.
And I guess the Latin connection between Louie’s uncle and that whole thing,
he came in and he was just like, with open arms. But it was crazy, because
every time we did a record, and every time an OG came in to record with us, he
would turn us on to somebody else. He’d be like, “That sounds good. Why don’t
you call so-and-so?” “No, we can’t.” “I’ll call them for you,” and then they’d
bring them in. It just kept going on like that; the domino effect kept going
on. It was crazy. We kept meeting different artists, and working with
different artists. I remember when we did the album, they didn’t know what we
were doing. Musically, it didn’t make sense to them. ‘Cause were two club
kids making this record, and trying to come up with all this music. And they would
be like, “You want us to play what? You want us to do what?” It was like,
“Just do it.” At the end, when they heard the whole album, they were like,
“Wow, we would have never thought that’s what you guys were doing, or trying
to do.” It was kind of cool.
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah, when we first started the Nuyorican Soul project, we reached out to the
artists we had relationships with. That was Tito Puente, Eddie Palmieri,
Jocelyn Brown, India and Roy Ayers. We knew all of them through the years. But
we would do things like, Roy Ayers was playing at the Shelter, and we went out
to the Shelter at four in the morning after his performance. We said, “Yo, we’re
working on this project called Nuyorican Soul.” Right away, we say the name,
everybody was like, “What’s that?” At least they were interested in that,
because they knew the Nuyorican thing from back in the days. That’s like a
‘60s term. He came in, so we had already that. But when we had to go to George
Benson now, we had to meet him in an office and everything. Tommy LiPuma,
who’s one of our pioneer producers, we love him; he’s produced everybody from
Miles Davis to George Benson, you name it. He introduced us to George Benson.
When George Benson came in the room, he looked at us like, “All right, what
you guys going to show us? What you guys going to show me that I ain’t seen
yet?” We were like, “Ooh.” He didn’t say that, but you could tell he was just
like, “What’s up?”
Kenny Dope 
 “Don’t waste my time.”
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah. We played this track. We had a guitar player kind of fake him, play like
him. We said, “Look, listen to this. We hear you on this type of a track.” It
was more like an afro Fela track at first. If you hear “You Can Do It,” that
song, it wasn’t even that. It was an afro track that we did. We wanted to get
Fela on it. Unfortunately, he had passed away about that time. He was one of
our dream people to have on Nuyorican Soul, but we didn’t get to have him on
it. We had that track. We said, “Let’s show him this track, see what he can do
on it.” When he came in the studio, he played on it. We got so inspired, that
we ended up creating a whole new track. And at that time, we were big on
drum&bass. We were all excited with Goldie’s stuff, Roni Size, listening
to their music. That actually inspired the track “You Can Do It” for George
Benson. You hear him doing this thing in the beginning of the song, this
beautiful piece that he does. He was just messing around in the studio. He was
like, [imitates guitar] “Da, da, da.” It was incredible. We were like, “Yo, what is that?” He’s
like, “I’m just exercising.”
[laughter]
It sounded amazing. What you hear in the beginning was that piece and he did
it in one take. That intro with just the guitar by itself on the Nuyorican
Soul album. That’s the way it kind of went. It just kept adding on and adding
on, it took a year and eight months to complete that album.
Shawn Reynaldo 
While you guys were doing this, Masters At Work was still active, and you guys
were still putting stuff out, and you’re both DJing, you’re both doing solo
work. As the ‘90s turned into the 2000s, Masters At Work’s output kind of
slowed down a bit. Was that because you guys got busy with your solo projects?
Was there any particular reason that Masters at Work sort of slowed down a
bit?
Kenny Dope 
Yeah, we did a big run. We came to a point where we did want to do separate
things, separate projects, and stuff like that. And that’s what we did. Louie
had his ideas that he wanted to do. You’ve got to respect the fact that when
somebody has a view in their head of what they hear, it wouldn’t have been the
same, me being there. The same way, vice-versa, if he was with me, and I got a
vision in my head of what I want to lay down, and I’m hearing it in my ear,
it’s not going to be the same because, it’s just going to be different. The influence
is going to be different. At that point, we just decided to, you know, “Let’s do
separate projects.” And then that’s when all the rumors started. Once they started
seeing, “Produced by Louie Vega,” or one of my things, the Bucketheads or
whatever, “Produced by Kenny Dope,” it was: “Oh, they broke up.” That was the
whole thing about it. It was like, we just let people run with it, pretty
much. It was at that point where we decided to just do separate projects and
stuff like that. And our thing is magical. [to Louie] When did we do Brazil?
Little Louie Vega 
About three months ago.
Kenny Dope 
Three months ago, that was the last time I saw him. We’re both traveling.
We’re both doing projects. But if this would turn into a studio right now, and
I didn’t see him in three months, we’ll bang out the record, whatever it is.
If there’s singers, if there’s musicians, it just happens. It’s just a gift
that we have, together, when we get together and do that. As DJs, it’s the
same thing. Nothing’s rehearsed. We’re just like, “What do you like right
now?” “I like these records. What do you like right now?” “I like these
records. Let’s just record, let’s go do it.” It’s just freestyle, at that
point. I don’t know what else to say. That’s pretty much what it is.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Twenty years in to making music together, or more than 20 years now, I’m
curious, for each of you, is there something that the other one is
particularly good at, that you’re jealous of?
[laughter]
Kenny Dope 
Nah. We both have different styles. I think Louie’s a great arranger, when it
comes to working with artists. I’ve got a different ear, when it comes to the
beat, and to the grittiness of it, to the way I want things to basically hit
you in your head, whereas he might like things a little bit more laid back.
But that’s the whole mix of it. That’s the whole beauty of the partnership,
because it’s two different people that like two different things all around.
That’s what makes the chemistry so good. Nah, I’m not jealous of him. I don’t
know if he is, but I ain’t.
[laughter]
Little Louie Vega 
Nah I think we had a really good run. It was 11, 12 years solid. I’m talking
about, we were working 18 hours a day. Kenny and I would not stop. It was all
about the music, and that was it. We’d be in studios, we even bought a huge
studio. It was beautiful. It was incredible. We had these different ideas. We
went out, did our own labels, and... I wanted to do an orchestra thing. I did
Elements of Life, he wanted to do r&b. There was all these things that we
wanted to do. I think that now, it’s come to a point where it’s come full
cycle. We’ve been talking about re-vamping the MAW Records label, and remixing
some of the old stuff, and then trying something new. We’re taking it step by
step. But right now, we’re just doing a couple of gigs. We did an incredible gig
at Rock In Rio with Stevie Wonder, Jamiroquai, Janelle, all on the same bill.
It was amazing. We’ve been doing events and festivals together. Something like
today was really special, because for us, it’s really special to come here and
talk to you guys. Anything that we could help out, the up-and-coming, or the
next generation, or just to help keep lifting what we all love, and it’s this
music. This was important for us to do. Thanks for having us here.
[applause]
Shawn Reynaldo 
I feel like now is a good time, why don’t we open it up to the audience? If
any of you guys have questions, I’m sure some of you do. There’s microphones
rolling around.
Audience Member 
How you doing? My name’s Hugo. I’ve been DJing for 20-plus years, played your
stuff since Cover Girls, all that stuff. Still play it today. In terms of
production, you guys started on, I’m assuming, [E-mu] SP-1200s, stuff like that? Do
you still use those today, or do you just strictly use digital audio work
stations now?
Kenny Dope 
I use everything still. It’s crazy, because SP-1200, there’s nothing that
could duplicate the sound, the swing, the feel. Sometimes I use a [MPC] 3000.
There was a period back then that Louie touched on before, that people were
trying to figure out what I was doing on a beat. I would take two machines and
sync them up together. With the two machines, it just gives you an odd swing.
You can’t figure it out. At that point, the computer was coming in. What they
were doing was sampling a beat, and taking my swing out of it. But it was all out
of whack, because it was two machines, so it didn’t make sense. They were
like, “Why ain’t this working?” It was just the machines that give it that
feel. I use a [MPC] 5000 now, sometimes. Sometimes I feel like going back to
the 12. There’s nothing like it. Like I said, it’s just so simple. You just
get there, and tap away; get some samples. It makes you work. It makes you
think. You only have two-and-a-half seconds of sampling time a pad, so it makes you chop
things up a certain way. And you normally wouldn’t do that on a computer or
keyboard or a long sampler.
Audience Member 
My name’s Henry. Man, again, I’m not trying to date myself, but I’ve been
listening to you guys for a long time.
Kenny Dope 
Thank you.
Audience Member 
For all the records that you guys have put out, and many of us, if not all of
us, were like, “Wow,” what were some of the records that you guys heard in
your career, coming up, whatever, and you’re like, “Oh sh--, that was dope”?
Kenny Dope 
We were just talking about Nuyorican Soul. I’m going to tell you this: There
was a time where we were basically on automatic pilot. You would just go in,
it was like clockwork. You’d have two, three studios booked at the same time,
different rooms going on. You were just going. I just knew what my job was. I
had rhythms in my head. I knew what I wanted to do. But the one time out of,
from ’88 to ’97 when that album came out, when we did the photo shoot for that
album, I was like, “Wow.” Because at that point, when you’re in a photo shoot
with all these giants, and you look around and you’ve got Eddie over there,
you’ve got Tito over there, you’ve got Benson over here, you’ve got the
orchestra over there, and it’s just like, “We did that? We brought all those
different type of people together?” I was like, “Wow.”
Audience Member 
Hey, how’s it going? My name is Manny. There’s this track you guys made; I
think it was Louie, in the ‘90s, the song with the [imitates track] “Do, do, do, do.”
Shawn Reynaldo 
Oh, that one.
[laughter]
Audience Member 
Wait, wait, wait. “French Kiss,” that’s the name of that song. I want to ask,
where’s the sample from, the girl?
Little Louie Vega 
Oh my goodness. There’s another Lil Louis, I’m not sure if you guys know. He’s
African-American, he’s from Chicago, and erm, he’s the one that made that record.
Kenny Dope 
That’s Lil Louis. This is Little Louie Vega. It’s a great track.
Little Louie Vega 
It’s amazing. That record sold five million records, that track that he made
in like two hours, with this girl moaning at the end, slowing down. [laughter] Louis
is a genius. He’s one of our favorite house producers. To me, he produced one
of the biggest albums of all time, for house music, which is Lil’ Louis &
The World. Don’t worry about. Between Lil Louis, and Lou Bega, I get it all
the time. I’m either “Mambo #5” or “French Kiss,” not Masters At Work.
[laughter / applause]
Audience Member 
Hello? Yeah, my name is AP; big fan. Louie, I’ve seen you play several times.
I’m good friends with Patrick Wilson, who’s your mutual friend. Can you talk
about, as many DJs are here, the importance of knowing your records? A lot of
people, especially with digital systems now, there’s a push to accumulate a
lot of music. Can you really get into knowing the records, knowing how to
deliver those records?
Little Louie Vega 
I think you need to listen to what you play from beginning to end, I think.
Take some time. All the records that I know, I know all the arrangements. I
know where that intro is, where that vocal comes in, where that break is. And
that really helps me. A lot of the DJs today play it a little different now.
It’s the computers, and Traktor and everything. Nobody really goes to the
middle of a song to play it from the break, or they won’t go to the vamp of
the song. They’ll play it with that 16-bar intro into the top, right in. I
think the important thing is to stay creative, man. You’ve got to be creative.
Just about anybody can DJ now. You know that, right? You get Traktor, Serato,
whatever it is. You barely even have to mix any more, do you? [laughter] I’m still
mixing. I’m sorry, but I’m using a pitch control, doing everything, we’re old
school, whatever. You have to do something extra. You really have to get
creative, overlaying these records, knowing where the breaks are, using
acappella sound effects, whatever it is that you want to do. You need to work
up your game and be creative. I think that’s what’s kept us where we are as
DJs. We keep it really interesting. Of course, the sound of your music as
well. A lot of people are using MP3s, low-quality MP3s, and you can hear it in a
club. When we come on, you hear a difference in the music, because we really
care about what we’re playing WAV files, AIFF files, whatever it is, we’re
really trying to keep the quality up high, trying to keep it warm, sounding
good. I think all those elements, and just use the tools you have, to the best
of your ability. It’s up to you to be creative. That’s nothing that you can be
taught. It has to be in you. Obviously, you have to have your technical side
of things, in knowing how to mix and blend and all that. But like I said, these
days, when I see some of these guys playing, nobody’s even mixing or nothing.
It’s connecting, they match on, and everything’s just playing down. So you don’t
really need to focus on that much anymore. It depends on how you want to
approach what you use to DJ out there. You’ve really got to do some creative
stuff to stand out. I’m a little bit disappointed in the way it is now these
days, because I don’t see people doing much work. I think they’re not really
being creative.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Who would you say some of your favorite DJs are, either today or historically,
that influenced you guys, or continue to?
Kenny Dope 
That’s a hard one.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Just say Larry Levan.
Kenny Dope 
Huh?
Shawn Reynaldo 
Just say Larry Levan.
Kenny Dope 
I can’t. I can’t say that. Maybe he could, but I can’t, because I wasn’t
there. I was too young to go there and to witness it, which is something I
wish I could have. At that time, at that era, I was listening to radio. We had
DJs like Chuck Chillout and Red Alert and Marley and Tony Humphries, which was
somebody who, on the radio, was riding three records at one time, which to me
was amazing, to hear it. Later on, I went to Zanzibar, and he would do that
live, too, which is... And on Thorens turntables, too. There’s no pitch, and it’s like you’ve got
to hold the platter to mix the records in, which is a whole other technique.
When Louie’s saying these kids got these devices that mix records, but at the
same time, the crowd knows it. I remember being in Korea, and the crowd was
pissed off. They were like, “When are you getting on?” I’m like, “When the
sound man comes. I’ve got to hook up my stuff.” They were mad, because the DJ
before me, had one of these setups. Basically, all the records were mixed, and
all he was doing was pushing faders up and down. They were upset. It was just
like, “Get on already.” To them, they feel cheated, in a way. And in Korea,
the dance scene, it’s new. I guess they’re on the computer, on their YouTubes,
and seeing other DJs, how they get down. Then they’ve seen this kid not doing
anything, pretty much. It’s upsetting for them. I think nowadays, we have so
much technology that it’s basically where your mind takes it. You could do so
many things now with those syncs and all that. If we got into that, there’s no
telling what can happen in a dancefloor. When you could have so many things
going on at once, forget it. It’s crazy. Like I said, it’s about people
getting in their mind and taking it that step further.
Little Louie Vega 
I think when you’re DJing, you should be telling a story. That’s what we try
to do. There is a new idea, though, that Kenny and I have been talking about,
with using Traktor, what I wanted to do was... Because if you listen to us DJ, if you come out tonight,
we’re playing a lot of things at the same time. It’s almost like records are
being remixed right in front of you, all new grooves to these songs that you
might know, or might not know. And I wanted to try something, where we could do
that with Traktor and overlay in a lot of stuff, creatively though, but really
doing some really cool musical stuff, live, right in front of everybody. We
have to sync us both up together in order to do that. He’s working on that
with the Native Instruments people and all that. It’s about being creative
with what you have. For me, you could have the simplest thing, but if you know
how to use it really well, you could blow out somebody who may have the
$50,000 equipment. It’s about what you do with what you have.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Any more questions in the audience? Yeah, there is.
Audience Member 
I had a quick question. I appreciate you guys’ work, and thank you guys very
much for being here. This kind of goes off of the question or the response
about being in Korea, but what are some other countries where you guys have
been well received, that we may not think of?
Kenny Dope 
Italy’s a huge market for us. Japan is a huge market. We just went to Brazil
for the first time a couple months ago, that was great. I think we’ve pretty
much touched everywhere. Iceland, crazy areas you would never think of. I
think people, when we go to these countries, they feel our music. They feel
us. They know that we’re passionate, they can see that we’re passionate about
it when we’re playing. My thing is, I still get amazed today when I get my
publishing checks and, you see these countries of where these records are being
played, that you can’t even pronounce. [laughs] It’s just crazy how far music
travels, and I think that’s a beautiful thing, for someone who just loves
music, and got into this DJing, and ended up producing and ended up with a
partnership and ended up with labels. I think that’s real cool.
Little Louie Vega 
I think another place is Africa. Right now, Africa is really, really big with
our music. I’ve been going out there since ’99, but the music has gotten so
huge now. It’s on the radio, TV; I’m talking about deep underground music. You
would be blown away. That’s where you see artists like Black Coffee, I don’t
know if you know these artists, Culoe de Song, and all of them blowing up out
there. I was there a few months ago, and I played in a stadium headlining in
front of 15,000 people. It was a rugby stadium. It was nothing but an ocean of
people, and playing the music that we play. It wasn’t playing drum crescendos
and everything, just to get everybody going like this. No, it was playing the
music. I was really blown away by how our music, Masters At Work and
everything, has influenced a lot of the young people there. The music caught
on to the youth. That’s what it is. When it catches on to the youth, it just
blows up. Over there, you’ve got 16-year-olds and up listening to this music on the
radio or on television, going to clubs, the older ones are going to clubs.
When I went out and played in the stadium, I was blown away. Because those are the
kind of things that Tiesto and David Guetta and everybody’s doing. I’m not
used to doing those kind of rooms, unless we do some really special thing,
like Rock In Rio or whatever. When I went out there and played our music,
and hearing our records in that size of a place, I was really blown away.
Right now, different countries are into different flavors. For us, luckily,
we’ve been really well-received in Italy. Italy has tons of clubs, and tons of
kids out there that really follow the music deeply. It reminds me a little of
Japan. Japan is a little deeper, though. They know everything. They know what
year it came out, when I played it, in what club. It’s crazy. They’ll know the
littlest things, that you won’t even think about.
Kenny Dope 
I remember when they were singing “Show Me” to you, I’ll never forget that.
Little Louie Vega 
They were what?
Kenny Dope 
Japanese girl came up singing “Show Me” to you. I was dying.
[laughter]
Little Louie Vega 
Yeah, he means a record, a song.
Kenny Dope 
Louie’s like, “What?”
Little Louie Vega 
It was a freestyle record that I made in 1986, and this girl…
Kenny Dope 
Local girl.
Little Louie Vega 
… she knew it. I was like, “OK.” It’s really amazing. Now, with the Internet,
obviously you can pretty much know anything about anybody. At least it helps
to educate a lot of the youth around the world. So when we go somewhere, people
are prepared now. They come in knowing the songs, knowing what’s happening.
Even if you just learned about it, you can study pretty much anybody out
there. I have to say thank you to everybody around the world that has opened
up their arms to us ‘cause we’ve really worked really hard. When nobody sees
us around, it’s because we’re in another country, doing what we do. It’s
amazing how big dance music has gotten around the world. You guys can just
take a look, and YouTube any one of these guys out there and see what’s
happening. I’m really thankful to you guys, to everybody around the world.
This all came from being a bedroom DJ in New York, that’s where we came from.
You guys, if you’re starting out there, don’t ever think you can’t get this
far, or even further. You can do it, trust me. If you really put your mind to
it, you’ve got to take every opportunity you can to learn from maybe somebody
else who’s doing what you like, and they’re doing it well, and they’re
successful. When I was young, I took advantage of all of those opportunities.
When Arthur Baker says, “You want to come in the studio and check it out?
Cool, sit back there.” That’s what I did. Latin Rascals, Shep Pettibone, like
all these guys were making music in the ‘80s, and I was this little kid, 17 or
18, 19. I would go into the studios and stay until four or five in the morning, just
watching them and learning. Take advantage of every opportunity you can to
learn. You’ve got to know your roots. You’ve really got to know your roots,
and where this music comes from. A lot of these DJs today just live on what is
happening now and they don’t know where it came from. All this music you’re
hearing, on an uptempo scale, even like you said before, even some of the hip-hop cats, you know, house music has been a big influence for a lot of producers and DJs,
in all spectrums of music. I guess that’s why we’re here, and I’m happy that
you guys do this thing. We need a lot more of this. And I’ve heard about the Red
Bull Music Academy thing for years, and I’m finally happy we got to do one.
You guys are great, man. I’m not trying to get rid of you all. [laughs]
[applause]
I feel like I’m saying good bye all the time, but I just want to thank you
guys, man. I did not expect this many people to be here. I was like, “There’s
going to be like 50 people. That’s cool.” I didn’t sleep at all. I came from
Miami, straight from a gig. I haven’t slept, and I was complaining to Josh and
everybody here, “Yo, I’m going to be tired. I don’t know if I can do this.” I
said, “There’s not many people going to be here.” We walked in and it was
packed. I was like, “OK.” Thank you so much. I really appreciate it.
Shawn Reynaldo 
There’s a question there.
Audience Member 
Hello. How y’all doing?
Kenny Dope 
Great.
Audience Member 
I’m Vince. I grew up DJing in New York in the ‘90s. I just want to thank you
all for your contribution. I remember Red [Alert] playing “Blood Vibes” back
in the day, and I went up to Rock & Soul [DJ equipment and record store] in Midtown and bought that record.
I really appreciate it. This question’s particularly for Kenny, and a segue
from what you all were just talking about, the tie between house and hip-hop.
I’ve seen a picture of you and [J] Dilla digging, and I wondered if you could
speak on that. Everybody knows, Jay Dee is a big hip-hop influence. What kind
of records were y’all talking about and digging about?
Kenny Dope 
Yeah, we were real cool. We were real tight and we always used to talk
records. He used to take this $50 flight from Detroit down to JFK all the
time, because at that point he was working with [A] Tribe [Called Quest]. I was
like, “Look, man, we’ve got to go get some records,” or whatever. He always
wanted to go shopping. Things didn’t pan out, things didn’t pan out. Finally
we said, “You know what? We’re going to do a buying trip.” He came down, we
got in the car. We drove to Philly, picked up Jazzy Jeff, and then we drove to
Pittsburgh.
[applause]
It was crazy. At that point, I had a Navigator. That truck was full of
records, from the back to the top. We had another car full, and we was just in
the shop, back to back. Literally, he was on my back, I was here; we were
digging back to back. “You got this?” “No.” “Alright, boom.” He would go and
pass me sh--. It’s just something I will never forget. He was definitely
another musical genius that we lost too soon. It was a great experience.
Shawn Reynaldo 
I think we have time for one more question.
Audience Member 
Brent, honored to have you here. Going a little bit on what you were
talking about earlier with the new generation, South Africa and then Italy... The
house sound that you guys champion, do you see that new generations are coming
into that here in America, or is it just an aging demographic?
Kenny Dope 
[to Louie] You got that one.
[laughter]
Little Louie Vega 
Even if you listen to music now, like... What do you guys know that’s on the pop
charts now with dance music? Rihanna? It’s funny, because we have a friend of
ours who’s at Jive Records, and he called me the other day and he says,
“Louie, I really want you guys to get together and write some new songs for me
because I really feel like in the pop market, it’s going in that direction.
It’s not going to be super underground, or deep or whatever, but they are
taking elements of that music, and I feel that’s going to be the next level.” I
think everything pretty much works in cycles. I have to say that I think it’s
coming back around where they’re going to want to do something funky. They’re
going to want to do something a little more soulful. It may not be the soulful-soulful, but it’s going to have some of those elements in there. It’s going to
take guys like us... And that’s how we make the change, guys like us
collaborating. One of the reasons why David Guetta blew up over here, let’s
say, for the music he makes, is because will.i.am was hanging out in Ibiza. He
was hanging out in Ibiza, he came in the DJ booth, and he said, “You want to
say hi to the crowd?” He gave him the mic, and all of a sudden he started
getting down with him. He was like, “We should get together some day. We
should write a song.” Next thing you know, a couple months later, “I’ve Got a
Feeling,” tonight’s gonna be a good night, whatever. That’s how it works.
It’s up to guys like us to reach out and collaborate with artists in the pop
genre. I feel that he was very smart in what he did. He came out here and
talked to all these artists and said, “Let’s do something together.” Once he
did it with one big one, then the other one wants to do it. That’s how it got
so huge. But I think now all that has happened, and in pop and they’re always going to seek
the new thing, or the new sound, or the new whatever. I feel that for Kenny
and I, we’re producers. Just because we made this music in a certain era,
we’re still making music now, and doing what we do. We’re just doing it more
internationally. It doesn’t mean that we can’t collaborate with artists like
that today. Music is always going to change. The good thing now with pop
music, as far as dance music is concerned, is that a lot of the pop artists
want uptempo music. You remember when it was at a certain level, it was
downtempo, it was very hip-hop influenced. Now, it’s very dance influenced. We
knew that a couple years ago, because people kept telling us, “Yo, a lot of pop
artists want to reach out to make dance music, to do uptempo music.” We
couldn’t believe it. We was like, “OK, cool.” But then it went in a direction
that’s a different sound than what we do. I think with all music, it just
works in cycles. It’s going to come around again where they want to be
soulful, they want to be funky, and even today, I’m hearing hip-hop artists
and r&b artists that I would never think would do the type of music
they’re doing. There’s a thing out on these really pop-house records, or
whatever. I think eventually, everybody’s going to want to try something else.
That’s how it works. We’re going to have to reach out, guys like us, who are
in that kind of a position, I’m not saying just me and him, there’s others.
Reach out to these artists and collaborate. The pop artists are the ones that
are ruling the airwaves. It’s just a handful of artists that are making that
kind of volume. To me, there’s a lot of things in limbo right now. That’s what
I feel, right? Me, I want to hear hip-hop, like Tribe Called Quest. I want to hear
all that type of hip-hop, and I know there’s an underground scene with hip-hop,
but I can’t even get to it, because I don’t hear it. You’ve got to reach out,
and you’ve got to find it. [to Kenny] He probably knows where it is. But for me,
and even in dance music, there’s a lot of the scene that’s in limbo. It’s not
popular, it’s underground; it’s in this area where, we became like jazz artists
almost, where you keep playing to your audiences around the world. To me, I
feel like a jazz artist. You have your following, we do, we could fill a place. It’s
cool and everything, but it’s not on the airwaves. It’s not in the pop culture
or market or whatever it is. But it’s up to us to try to make it happen. For me,
I’ve always told Kenny, “Yo, we could do that. We could do that, but our way.”
The thing is that we don’t want to do something, and sound like the sound
that’s there, if we’re not feeling that. We can get influences from it, but
we’re never going to make a record, and you’re going to hear the sound and
say, “That’s not Masters At Work.” We’re not going to, it’s always going to be
us. For me, I feel that we need to do something. We definitely need to do
something.
Shawn Reynaldo 
They’re telling me one more question, actually.
Audience Member 
This is a question to you guys. Are you guys going to do the Magic Sessions
again at the [Winter] Music Conference? The reason I’m asking that’s because
one of the most memorable experiences I had was back in, I think, ’98, when
you guys had Tito Puente, La India and Roy Ayers play live at it. Also there, I
met these two guys, they called themselves Daft Punk back then. I thought it
was so awesome back then that those guys were listening to you guys play, and
now we’ve got Daft Punk and that whole electro-disco-house movement out of
that. Are you guys going to do Magic Sessions again? Because I think that was
a very inspirational event for artists.
Little Louie Vega 
That was a Masters At Work party, but yeah, we used to do these things. We did
it for about seven years, and they were great parties. What we’re trying to do
is get back into it together. When we create the right kind of project, we’re
going to do a world tour with it. That’s what it’s about. Of course, we’re
going to do Miami. Those were great times. It’s going to be a fun Miami this
year. Check out what’s going on, there’s a lot of good things. We’re not doing
a Masters At Work thing, but hopefully next year we’ll do something really
big. We just found out that the Opium Room is called Amnesia now. That’s the
room we used all the time when we did the Masters At Work parties, at the ten-
year anniversary and all that stuff that you’re hearing about; or you probably
were there. That was a great time, because we did influence all those guys. If
you talk to anybody from Bob Sinclair, to Martin Solveig, David Guetta, Daft
Punk, you name it, I think that we at least had a little something to do with
a lot of those guys. There’s a little piece of us in all those guys, and more
of them. And they were at those parties, hanging out, checking it out. Hopefully,
we will definitely do them. For me, my dream is for us to get together, and
it’s all about how we connect. You’ve got to understand, Kenny and I haven’t
really connected in the studio for years; a long time. I’m really interested
to see how it’s going to work. I really feel it’s going to be great, but I’m
interested to see what’s going to come out of it. I feel that we can create a
nice project, and really show the world that we’re here. We’re still here, and
this is the new, what we’re doing right now.
Shawn Reynaldo 
Well, we’re all going to get the chance to see you guys connect tonight at 1015
Folsom or 103 Harriett, whatever you want to call it. Let’s give a big round
of applause to Masters At Work.
[applause]
Kenny Dope 
Thank you, thank you.
