In the early ’70s, Michael Rother quit Kraftwerk, a move that may seem insane if not for his going on to take part in several seminal krautrock bands which influenced the likes of Brian Eno, David Bowie, Stereolab, and Thom Yorke. As part of Neu! and Harmonia, Rother pushed rock and electronic music towards a more rhythmic and experimental future with hypnotic percussion, stripped-down arrangements, and post-psychedelic soundscapes. 
In this lecture at the 2014 Red Bull Music Academy in Tokyo, Rother provided a look into the German proto-punk scene whose reverberations can still be felt around the world.
Hanna Bächer 
A very warm welcome to Michael Rother.
[applause]
Michael Rother 
Hello.
Hanna Bächer 
What we just saw was that Kraftwerk minus Ralf, or was it Neu! plus Florian?
Michael Rother 
That was a hipster band. Last year, we performed. [laughs]
Hanna Bächer 
Williamsburg. Michael Rother Trio.
Michael Rother 
That was the lineup of Kraftwerk for six months in 1971. Ralf Hütter had
decided to go back to university, and that’s why I was invited to join the
band and to perform live. Actually, this wasn’t one of the best concerts,
quite the opposite.
Hanna Bächer 
I thought it was quite good.
Michael Rother 
Yeah, yeah, I know. Many people think they like it, but that was a huge TV
studio with only four technicians, so we were playing, like, in sort of outer
space. There was no feedback, nothing from the audience, and at the time, we
were really dependent on communication with the audience. Anyway, if you like
it, it’s fun.
Hanna Bächer 
One of the reasons that you were dependent on interaction with an audience is
that you’ve actually never recorded anything with Kraftwerk, at least not
anything that got released. Why was that?
Michael Rother 
The distinction is right. We did record, I think, about 25 minutes with Conny Plank as co-producer in 1971, but halfway through, that was already near
the end of our collaboration, and we realized that in the studio it didn’t
work. This was very wild, improvised music, and in the studio, we had the same
clinical situation, and we didn’t really get far, so we decided to stop, and
the tapes are probably in the vault with Florian Schneider.
Hanna Bächer
Would you like to rerelease that, or ever release it?
Michael Rother 
I’m not so sure if that’s really worthy of a release, but for historical
reasons, of course, it would be interesting to… Actually, maybe, I think most of
you are musicians. At least that’s what I was told.
Hanna Bächer 
That’s true.
Michael Rother 
Okay. And so, some of you, or most of you may know that Kraftwerk deny, or they
do not look upon the first three albums as the real Kraftwerk concept, which
is really sad. After Florian Schneider left a few years ago, they considered
the beginning of the real Kraftwerk era, Autobahn, which was, I think,
released in ’74. And so the first three albums are kept under the carpet. I’m
not sure, because there’s always demand by the audience to have those albums
released, and there have been talks, and sometimes there have been promises,
but I think it’s just their decision, of course, which has to be accepted.
It’s an artistic decision, which is unfortunate because especially, I think,
the third album has some really beautiful music.
Hanna Bächer 
If you had to pin down the artistic differences between you and Klaus Dinger,
who is on the drums and Ralf and Florian, how would you describe that?
Michael Rother 
You mean between Neu! and Kraftwerk?
Hanna Bächer 
Well, between the four of you when you still played together, what did you
want that was different than those two?
Michael Rother 
I didn’t get the question, really.
Hanna Bächer 
I’m sorry, two Germans on the couch.
Michael Rother 
The thing is, I jammed with Ralf Hütter but I never played as Kraftwerk with
Ralf Hütter.
Hanna Bächer 
Okay.
Michael Rother 
That’s a different situation. I only played with Florian and Klaus. I
guess when we started the project Neu!, after splitting with Kraftwerk, we did
take some of the experiences with us, of course. And the first track on the
first Neu! album, maybe some of you know it, “Hallogallo,” which is one of the
most popular Neu! tracks, I guess, that features a very soft approach to this
fast-forward-reaching music, which was our idea at that time; a music that
sort of runs forward and has no ending, is aimed at the horizon, or beyond. I
guess, that is part of an analysis, a conclusion, of the experiences we had
with playing with Kraftwerk.
Hanna Bächer 
What we just saw was in ’71, so you were 21 years old, I suppose.
Michael Rother 
Twenty, yeah.
Hanna Bächer 
Where were you living at the time, and what did you do musically other than
being in Kraftwerk?
Michael Rother 
I was living in Düsseldorf, and I was working in a mental institute, a
hospital. I was a… What is it? A conscientious objector because I refused to serve in the
military at the time. I’m not sure, how is the situation? Okay. Many
nationalities, different in every country. These days, in Germany, I think you
just have to send in a postcard, or maybe there isn’t even any draft anymore.
Audience Member
[inaudible]
Michael Rother 
So we have like, a professional Army now without any material. [laughs] I’m not
complaining. But at the time, it was very difficult because it was still the
time of the Cold War. I guess, not many around here have any memories of their
own of that time, which was a time of paranoia, world politics, struggles
between West and East, East and West. And in Germany, there was always this fear of being
invaded by the Soviet Union, by the Army, whether it was realistic or not.
That was the situation, and so the German government made it very hard for
people not to serve in the Army, do service, and you had to have good reasons.
You had to prove that your conscience forbade you to serve in the military;
that you were not able to pick up a weapon. At this very serious court
hearing, they tried to trick you with trick questions, like, “What would you
do if a Russian soldier storms into your flat and wants to rape your
grandmother?” Or something like that. Yeah, it was really terrible, and we
argued along for an hour. Of course, we didn’t get anywhere, and in the end,
they just said, “Okay, you didn’t convince us, but anyway, here you go. We
don’t want you in the Army anyway.” [laughs] They were probably happy to get rid of me.
I would’ve just caused problems in the Army, making other people catch the
idea of resisting that idea. Anyway, sorry, that’s a long excursion now. And
so I was working in this mental institute near Düsseldorf, which was a
wonderful experience, by the way, a very valuable experience to serve people
with handicaps. I even had a band in that hospital for a while consisting of
some patients and also some of the active people working there. So what was the
question again, half an hour ago? That was what I was doing at the time. Okay,
now I got it. One day, we were in the streets of Düsseldorf. There were so
many issues we were fighting about with authorities. There was still the very
conservative attitude and the structures, political and social structures, and
we were opposing many of these ideas. There was one guitar player who was
also working in that hospital, and he had an invitation to join a band called
Kraftwerk in the studio.
Hanna Bächer 
Had you heard of them before that?
Michael Rother 
No, I didn’t know the music. I hadn’t heard the band’s name at all, and I
thought it was quite silly.
Hanna Bächer 
Did you think the same thing when you first heard the music, your first
meeting with them and them playing music to you, did you think it’s silly or
did you like it?
Michael Rother 
I didn’t get that.
Hanna Bächer 
When Kraftwerk first played their music to you?
Michael Rother 
No, the thing was, I went into the studio. I picked up a bass, and I jammed
with Ralf Hütter. I didn’t know anything of the background, it was just that
it was a very special situation. Florian Schneider and Klaus Dinger were
sitting in the studio in chairs and listening on a sofa, actually, listening,
enjoying it, and Ralf Hütter and I, we also had a great time. That was, for
me, the first situation where I discovered that I was not completely alone
with my idea of creating a music that was different, different from Anglo-
American musical structures that are mostly, or were mostly, based on the blues. That was one
of the main ideas I had. I wanted to steer away from that. Of course, also, I
tried to forget all the heroes of the time before, and to start a new way.
Hanna Bächer 
Who were the heroes of the time before for you?
Michael Rother 
Where should I start? Well, okay, maybe I should start in my teenage times.
When my family returned from Pakistan, where we stayed for three years, that
was ’63, the big time of the British beat explosion, I think was the name that
was given, with all these exciting bands, Beatles, Kinks, Stones, and many
more. I was completely blown away by that music. Many of my friends at school,
they all wanted to start a band, play in a band, so that was the situation. It
was really a very fresh movement of music, a big change happened in the early
’60s. Those were the early heroes. Later on, of course, also bands like Cream
and Jimi Hendrix, whom I still love, I can say. I mean, I don’t want to be Jimi
Hendrix, I wanted to be a copy of Jimi Hendrix for a while when I was a
teenager, but I luckily understood that I would never be a better Jimi Hendrix
than the original. So, those were the heroes of the ’60s.
Hanna Bächer 
You also had a another band when you were a teenager called Spirit of Sound, right? What happened to them then?
Michael Rother 
Unfortunately, the band fell apart when I told them that I was leaving.
Hanna Bächer 
To go to Kraftwerk?
Michael Rother 
Yes. Actually, the band was already at a dead end. We developed, we started in
the mid-’60s by being really pure copycats, and then over the years, like I
grew older, and we got more ambitious. We started improvising more, adding
more of our own ideas, and tried to push the boundaries, the limits. But that came
to an end. Of course, back then, I didn’t know what would happen ten years
later, but I was getting more dissatisfied every month, and so it was like a
lucky star that I met, ran into the Kraftwerk people, and everything changed
from then on.
Hanna Bächer 
You also left them, together with the drummer. You had first met Klaus Dinger
in Kraftwerk, you weren’t friends before that?
Michael Rother 
That’s right. I didn’t know any of those people. I’d never heard of the band,
and I was working in the hospital, and when I was not working in the hospital
I was with my girlfriend, so there was not any connection to the musical scene
in Düsseldorf at all.
Hanna Bächer 
Should we listen to “Hallogallo,” maybe, that you mentioned before? Released,
I think, in 1973, is that right? ’72? Thank you.
(music: Neu! – “Hallogallo” / applause)
Michael Rother 
Thank you.
Hanna Bächer 
You have mentioned Conny Plank before who did record the never-released
Kraftwerk stuff with you in the lineup, and he also recorded the first Neu!
album. So maybe to the people who don’t know who Conny Plank is, introduce
him?
Michael Rother 
Wow, where should I start? I mean, we would all have gotten nowhere, I guess,
without Conny Plank. He was so important. He was an innovative sound engineer
who was willing to take risks with all these crazy musicians with no money,
big ideas and no money in the pocket. The truth is, really, we owe Conny Plank
so much it’s hard to express. I’m quite 100% sure that, especially the first
Neu! album would never have gone that far without Conny’s contributions. I
guess it’s quite difficult today to imagine with how little gear Conny Plank
was able to create those soundscapes. Today, with all the electronic devices
that at a finger’s touch add crazy effects, and which are used, of course,
like Kaoss pads, maybe some of you know the Kaoss pads, which are great, but
back then, if I remember correctly, and I’m quite sure that there wasn’t
anything else but a tape machine that he used for delays. Just a stereo delay,
one delay, and then a reverb chamber next door, and maybe a limiter or two for
the drums, and everything else was just the result of clever manipulation, of
thinking the right things, of memorizing the good elements, which were
scattered all over the [recording]. Well, it was only eight-track actually,
the first [recordings], but still, eight tracks. Because we recorded those
songs without having a clear idea when we started, it was just like action
painting. That’s an image I sometimes bring up because Klaus Dinger and I, we
lay down a basic track. We went into the studio, Klaus played drums, I played
guitar or bass… And each of us, we didn’t actually talk about music, but we
just sat there, and then we inspired each other by adding overdubs. And Conny
Plank added great inspiration by his thoughts, his recommendations. In
“Hallogallo,” for instance, maybe you will have recognized that some of the
guitars are played backwards, and so I was in the recording room doing an
overdub guitar, and Conny Plank decided to turn the tape around, so everything
was running backwards, and whether he knew it, I don’t know, or not… I love
everything music that runs backwards or is slowed down, and even better,
slowed down and running backwards. [laughs]
Hanna Bächer 
I’m sure there are some people in the room that would play your songs with
their stuff that has this element all the way through it.
Michael Rother 
Yeah, it’s just the excitement of music running backwards, the… Of course, your
ideas are also turned around, and something completely different happens. By
the way, Jimi Hendrix did wonderful backwards guitars. Anyway, so when Conny
Plank turned around the tape, that really pushed me and inspired me to record
new melodies on top. Yes, Conny Plank worked for Kraftwerk, for Neu!, with
Cluster, Harmonia, and later on with Deutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft, DAF,
as far as I know. He was involved, from my point of view, in nearly all of the
exciting new experimental rock music that came out in the early ’70s.
Unfortunately, Conny passed away in 1987, but he really left a big, big mark
in music, and… So, thanks to Conny.
Hanna Bächer 
How much time did you actually have to record this first album?
Michael Rother 
Not much time. Actually, we had four days to record, do the recordings, and
then one week for the mixing, which we did in another studio. I already
explained that we did not, or maybe I did not explain in detail… If you try
to imagine the situation in the early ’70s, no multitrack of course, no
computer at home enabling you to do sketches of the music. It was all inside
our minds, and all I had was a tape cassette, mono or stereo, I don’t know,
which I could use to just memorize maybe a melody, like the melody of
“Weissensee” on the first Neu! album. Everything else was just a vision of
music, and it happened on the spot while we were in the studio. And so, four days,
you can imagine, with overdubs… It’s like running forward. It’s also a working
method, like the track “Hallogallo.” Not much time to waste. And that, although, of
course, we were limited by the lack of money. I would have loved to have four
weeks back then, but that was just unrealistic. On the positive side, of
course I had this pressure – maybe Klaus felt it too, I’m not so sure – but I
definitely felt the pressure of the time ticking away, you know, the days running out.
But on the other side, the positive side, this limitation forces you to sharpen
your ideas and to come to a conclusion very quickly. Later on, we may touch
that later on, when I started my own studio with equipment, and since
then, the available time to record, to create your ideas and to record, is
factually limitless, and hard disks and whatever are so cheap you can just
make notes of every single idea. The problem or the danger is, of course,
because you’re not forced to come to the conclusion and to make decisions,
actually, you can get lost quite easily. It happens to me. It happens to many
musicians I know. But back then, the limitations were there, and we knew, “Okay,
now we have to get this song together and finish and then time is over.”
Hanna Bächer 
I talked to some members of Can, and they said that overdubbing killed Can. So
as soon as they weren’t forced to just go in the studio together and play
one song at once to record it to 2-track, it was over, because the magic was
gone, because you could redo everything, and they had their own studio, so
limitless time. Did you and Klaus then practice outside of the studio? Did you
play a lot together when you were not recording with Conny Plank for four
nights?
Michael Rother 
I think we didn’t even once make any music together outside of the studio. We
tried to play live in ’72, and then I remember we played together in a small
space that he had in his flat. But before we went into the studio, there was
absolutely no way of playing, of creating the ideas. It was really happening
on the spot.
Hanna Bächer 
Was all that in Hamburg, or was it in Düsseldorf?
Michael Rother 
The first Neu! album, actually the first two Neu! albums were recorded in
rental studios in Hamburg, which was, of course, the reason for the clock
ticking away. And the third Neu! album in 1974, Conny Plank started his own
recording studio near Cologne, and then we had much more time, and much more
tracks, which also created problems. Actually, the second Neu! album, which we
recorded in ’72, late ’72, and early ’73, we recorded that on 16-track, and
that caused these problems, which I already mentioned. Doing all these
overdubs, the time just flies away. I don’t know how many of you know the
story of the second Neu! album, which has two very different sides. The first
side was what we were actually aiming at, but we spent so much time recording
those tracks, that at the end of the week, we didn’t have music for the second
side, and so that was the time when we had to make drastic measures.
Hanna Bächer 
I might play “Super 78” to illustrate that.
(music: Neu! – “Super 78” / applause)
This track is one minute, 36 seconds long. Was that the exact time you had to
fill?
Michael Rother 
No, we did several experiments on that second side. The first decision was to
use the two tracks that had been released a few months earlier on the only
single Neu! recorded. Actually, Giorgio
Moroder, who was
in the first lecture, and Conny Plank suggested that we should record that
single in Munich in Giorgio Moroder’s studio.
Hanna Bächer 
The one that we just played?
Michael Rother 
No, the original.
Hanna Bächer 
The disco version.
Michael Rother 
The original version.
Hanna Bächer 
The original version.
Michael Rother 
“Super” and “Neuschnee,” the two tracks. They were recorded in Giorgio’s [studio].
Hanna Bächer 
“Super 16,” though. It’s the same track that we just listened to. Well, it’s
the brother track of what we just listened to.
(music: Neu! – “Super 16” / applause)
Klaus, the lion.
Michael Rother 
How did you like it?
Hanna Bächer 
I would love to hear the Giorgio Moroder version of that.
Michael Rother 
Giorgio Moroder only gave us the studio. We rented the studio. He was there,
we met, but Conny Plank did the recordings. It was a very strange situation. I
remember, it’s a very tall building in Munich. It was very famous at the time,
Arabellahaus, and his studio was two floors, two stories below the surface of
the earth. It was very strange to go down into that space with all these pipes
and a long cellar running down the length of the house, and actually, we had
to stop three times. We needed three takes for three-and-a-half minutes of
“Super” because Klaus didn’t get enough fresh air, so he just nearly
suffocated, and after a minute of beating the drums the way he did, in a very
spectacular way, he just fell off the drum stool.
Hanna Bächer 
There’s something really dangerous about this track because James Holden, who was here
on Monday, said he once had a car crash because he listened to this track
while driving, right?
Michael Rother 
I have to refuse responsibility for that, [laughter] although I feel pity.
Hanna Bächer 
In this first half of the ‘70s, you were working with Klaus Dinger as Neu!,
but you also met two other really nice fellows who happened to have sat on
this couch. Well, on another couch but on one of our couches before, and
that’s Cluster, or as
they say (German pronunciation] “Kluhster.” How did you first meet?
Michael Rother 
It’s… No, I’m not going to do a Monty Python sketch now. [laughs]
Hanna Bächer 
Oh, yes please, absolutely!
[laughter]
Michael Rother 
There’s one about Miss Elk and the theory about the brontosaurus. Does anybody
know that one? Don’t tempt me. [laughs] Anyway, may I interrupt you and
mention that that’s what John Cleese as Miss Elk says at the BBC interview,
very funny. Please check Monty Python’s Miss Elk theory about the brontosaurus
because they are thin at one end, very thick in the middle, and then very thin
at the far end. [laughs] Okay, sorry.
Hanna Bächer 
That relates you meeting Cluster? How?
Michael Rother 
No. No, no. I wanted to say, get back to that track “Super 16,” which
Tarantino, maybe some of you may have even recognized that tune because
Tarantino used it in Kill Bill Part 1. Tarantino is a big fan of Eastern
kung fu films, obviously, and there was this Chinese film director in the ‘70s
who used our music without contacting us, without clearing any rights.
Audience Member
[inaudible / names film]
Michael Rother 
Wow, right. Up and down, all the music, Kraftwerk, Neu!, and maybe also Tangerine Dream. I’m not so sure. Tarantino, being of a fan of… What’s the name of the film director?
Audience Member
[inaudible] I can’t recall right now. 
Michael Rother 
Okay, but anyway, so that’s why Tarantino asked for, got permission to use that
track, which is quite funny. When the evil guy shows up, that’s the flying
guillotine, and this track is used in the scene where… What’s her name, the
lady boss of the gangsters?
Hanna Bächer 
Kill Bill fans in here?
Michael Rother 
Anyway, before the killing starts, and she just appears on the balcony, and
then… [imitates Neu! track] Okay, sorry. When did I meet…?
Hanna Bächer 
Back to reality. You were in Kill Bill land for a bit. Back to West Germany,
early ’70s.
Michael Rother 
That’s right. After releasing the second Neu! album, Klaus and I, because I
think I touched [on] that, we could work in the studio using the multitrack
technique, of course. I could record several guitars, etc. and pianos and
stuff, and Klaus could sing and do other instruments, and that didn’t work
live, obviously. With one man at the drums and one guitar player. The sound
was not satisfying. We were not the… What are they? The White Stripes? So we
had this invitation to do a tour to Great Britain by United Artists, the label
that released our albums in the UK, and we had this problem that we didn’t
know any musicians who seemed suited. I mean, maybe now, looking back, it
makes absolute sense because we tried to be different, so that’s the reason
why we didn’t find any other people; we wanted to be different from everybody
else. But then I heard this track on the Cluster album, the second, I think it
was, called “Im Süden,” and I realized that there was something, there was a
connection to my idea of melody and harmony. Do you have it on the [computer]?
Hanna Bächer 
I might. I might have it.
Michael Rother 
That’s quite fascinating. Conny Plank was, of course, involved, and so I
decided to pay a visit to those two musicians, and I took my guitar along and
visited them in the place in the country. Actually, the place where I still
live these days, in the middle of nowhere in Germany. Yeah, that’s it.
Hanna Bächer 
How does this place look like exactly? What is it?
Michael Rother 
I’m not sure about the English expression. It’s a collection of houses. It’s
not connected to any city. It’s outside. It’s right next to the river Weser.
Hanna Bächer 
Now there’s stores, or is it literally just a few houses where people live in?
Michael Rother 
No stores, no, no. You have to ride on a bike for 15 minutes or drive with a
car to the next store, and it is very quiet, quite the opposite of Tokyo,
Shibuya at least, and very green. So the view from my window is amazing. It
never fails to have this magic on me. I just see the river, and of course, in
different seasons, you have different lights all the time. Nature has
different colors, and after the river, there’s only fields, and some
kilometers away you have soft hills. That’s a very soothing atmosphere, very… It’s
good for your soul, very relaxing.
Hanna Bächer 
So you moved there and started doing music with them?
Michael Rother 
Okay, well, actually, it was the other way around. Because I was so fascinated
by the music, in the beginning, I jammed with Hans-Joachim Roedelius [of Cluster] only. He
played electric piano, and his way of playing the piano with repetition,
repetition, repetition… Going on like a loop, actually, but of course with some very
clever… He wasn’t clever, it was just the result of the way he played with
delay, etcetera; some movement in this pattern. But that was a perfect backdrop or
combination with my guitar, and I immediately fell in love with that music,
and it was so important that I decided to quit Neu!, quit Düsseldorf, and took
my guitar and moved to that place, and we started the band Harmonia.
Hanna Bächer 
Shall we still listen to a bit of “Im Süden”?
Michael Rother 
Please.
Hanna Bächer 
So that’s without you, that’s just Moebius and Roedelius.
(music: Cluster – “Im Süden”)
This goes on for another 11 minutes, but maybe we listen to something where you were… Actually involved in?
Michael Rother 
How about a hand for Cluster? [laughs]
[applause]
Hanna Bächer 
So you released Musik Von Harmonia with the band Harmonia, that consisted of
you and Moebius and Roedelius in ’74, and this is a track called “Watussi.”
(music: Harmonia – “Watussi” / applause)
Who was in charge of that beat?
Michael Rother 
Pardon?
Hanna Bächer 
Who was in charge of that beat?
Michael Rother 
I’m not totally sure, but it was on my drum machine. I had a very… It was the beginning of
drum machines, they were actually used by, how do you call these musicians
playing in hotels on their own, solo entertainer, and so they had a companion,
and those machines, it was a Farfisa model. It sounded like [messily beatboxes],
something like that. Very silly, of course, on its own. So you had to do
something with it.
Hanna Bächer 
What did you do?
Michael Rother 
Erm… We chopped it up, slicing it.
Hanna Bächer 
Like cutting tape.
Michael Rother 
No, not on tape. We ran the sound of the drum machine through different
small… We didn’t have sophisticated gear, of course, we were poor musicians,
very simple gear, but… For instance, a delay, and then very important was a
Schaller Tremolo. I’m not sure if anybody has heard of that. It was used in
the late ‘50s and ‘60s by guitar players to do… [imitates guitar tremolo] Anyway, I’m not a technician, so I cannot really explain, but it changes the
amplitude, so the sound disappears, and then it comes up again, and depending
on the speed, you could change the speed of that tremolo, and if you found the
sweet spot where it connected to the delay and the beat, the tempo of the
beat, and of course, the wah-wah pedal, and… At other occasions, we also used fuzz
boxes, so everything that chopped up the original silly sound was just
welcome, and in that case it was the tremolo, I guess, with the wah-wah pedal
and a delay. It’s a good example, that it is very special. Maybe I should also
explain how we recorded because at the time, in ’73, when I joined the two
guys and we started Harmonia, we had two Revox stereo machines, A77, I think,
was the type. I think they’re still around. It’s like a cult tape machine. We
played together, we recorded on one machine, and then we ran that through a
small mixer and recorded and played onto that track and then recorded the
result on the next. Of course, we had tape hissing with every generation lost,
added, but we had to do it. There was no multitrack, of course, affordable
multitrack at the time, so we did this ping-ponging style, and that’s how we
recorded “Watussi” and most of that stuff on the first Harmonia album. There
are some live recordings also, which were only recorded during a concert, and
nothing was changed. But “Watussi” is a good example of all three of us adding
their color, Moebius adding these… [makes noises] Moebius has this amazing
ability of surprising people by…
Hanna Bächer 
Giving a sh—, basically.
Michael Rother 
No, no, he has very good taste, but he does not organize it. He just lets it
happen, especially at that time, and sometimes it was terrible. All of us did
terrible things from time to time, but sometimes it was slightly off, but when
it was good, it was really great what Moebius especially contributed to the
music and Roedelius played this piano, this organ sound, which just goes
around in a loop, and… Maybe some of you know it better from musical theory, but I
do not really understand where the pattern starts and where it stops, and that
has been something that has always fascinated me, the idea of a loop, a
repetition, something just going on and on and on.
Hanna Bächer 
Do you think this has anything to do with you also growing up in Pakistan?
Were you exposed to music back then that was played there that infected you
with that idea of repetition?
Michael Rother 
I’m pretty sure that being exposed to that magical-sounding music as a young
boy, I was nine when we moved to Pakistan, and I heard these bands playing in
the streets with, of course, harmonic scales, which I didn’t understand, but
it was just this music that kept on going. It kept on going without starting
really and definitely not with any end, so it was a music, an idea of endless
music, and of course, with completely different harmonic approach. This idea
is still with me, and it was, of course, part of my thinking when we did Neu!
and Harmonia.
Hanna Bächer 
On the other hand, you just talked about music theory. You did not have any
academic or proper music school background, right?
Michael Rother 
That’s right. I steered away from all theory. I’m sure my teacher at school
would have accepted any bet that this guy would never become a musician.
[laughs]
Hanna Bächer 
You are able to read notes now, or not? Are you able to read notes?
Michael Rother 
No, no. I can’t make head or tail. No really. I don’t need to read notes. For
my music, it’s all in your ears and your mind and your heart, and what you
don’t have there you don’t need on paper. But then, there are many ways to
make music, so if somebody has the desire to learn to read notes, that’s fine, but for me, it was never a question. I didn’t want to. I didn’t want to know also
about theory. Actually, there’s one story, there was one musician in
Düsseldorf with whom we tried to work, and he was at university learning
theory, and he was so restrained, knowing all [musical theories], “You can’t
do this. This is not allowed. You should not do this.” Maybe that was the
wrong perception he had, but I thought, “No, I don’t need any restraints. I
want to be free to make all the mistakes and all the decisions.” It’s all
here [pats chest]. I don’t really need notes, and I do not miss that.
Hanna Bächer 
Obviously, in this time in Germany in the early ‘70s, there were a lot of
political changes, or people, not even in a political way but in a private way
trying to live differently to what was the common idea of, I don’t know,
having your small family and being employed in a safe job. Did such ideas of
doing it different than society go into the music that you were doing?
Michael Rother 
We were different, of course. You can’t separate that. We gave up this idea of
doing an academic way, or a normal job. Of course, I was very fortunate, I must
say, looking back because of the lucky circumstances of meeting the right
people at the right time, and if I hadn’t run into the Kraftwerk studio, if I had
decided to meet my girlfriend instead, I would probably never have met them,
and everything would’ve been different, but Roedelius and Moebius… Roedelius
is quite a bit older, he has a long history which I cannot really explain,
but he had different jobs over the years, but I’m not sure whether he even had
any education, but all that was left behind just to make music. And while I was
still at school, I thought I’d maybe become a lawyer to help people. [laughs] That was the time of…
Hanna Bächer 
Is that what a lawyer does? Are you sure?
Michael Rother 
Yes, well, that was my understanding, reading Schiller’s Sturm und Drang
period-books, pieces which really appealed to me at the time, and I thought,
“Yeah, that would be something, help the people.” Then later on, I was
fascinated by psychology, and I even started studying psychology, but it
didn’t have a chance against music. Music was just too strong, the appeal, and
because it was also made easy for me by the combination with Kraftwerk and
then releasing the first Neu! album, I quit university, and… Yeah, for me, it was the
right decision, definitely, being lucky.
Hanna Bächer 
That’s while we’ll listen to another Harmonia recording that got recorded a
few years later and features a quite rather famous guy.
(music: Harmonia & Eno – “Lüneburg Heath” / applause)
Michael Rother 
Before you give it away, does anybody know the voice?
Audience Member 
Brian Eno.
Michael Rother 
Yeah, very, very clear and a very special voice.
Hanna Bächer 
Yeah, that’s true. I quite like the bass sound too.
Michael Rother 
Mm-hm.
Hanna Bächer 
Did that get mixed right on-spot in Forst?
Michael Rother 
Yeah, yeah, sure, we record that on my four-track. At that time, ’76, we’re
talking about ’76 when Brian Eno accepted our invitation to come to Forst,
which we had given him two years earlier when he came to our concert in
Hamburg. It took him two years, but then strangely enough, at the time,
Harmonia had already disbanded, so we in ’76, all of us quit Harmonia and
recorded solo albums. But when Brian called and said, “Now, I would like to
come and visit you,” and we…
Hanna Bächer 
You pretended nothing happened.
Michael Rother 
[laughs] I’m not sure if we pretended nothing happened, but of course we
accepted that, and it was a very wonderful time. He stayed for maybe 11 or 12
days, I’m not so sure. He brought some blank tapes with him, and we had the
machines, and a lot of time, we just went into the studio, jammed, played,
collected sketches, moved on, drank tea, took walks, and played ping pong. He
wasn’t that great. [laughs] Okay, sorry. And talking a lot. There was
absolutely no pressure when we were together because there was no idea of
releasing an album. It was just the idea of exchanging ideas, of spending a
creative time together, and all of that was recorded on four channels, and
sometimes only two of us were in the studio and Moebius was cooking or
whatever, he’s a good cook. Sometimes all four of us in different
combinations. I remember Brian brought his small… What was it? An EMS
synthesizer. Does anybody know that one with a patch? Okay, and so he sent my
guitar through that, which was a great, inspiring sound. Yes, that was four
tracks. Four guys, four tracks. Each one had a track, and then off you go.
Hanna Bächer 
What happened after the recording to the tapes?
Michael Rother 
Um, yeah, that’s the funny part. He was on his way to record an album with David Bowie,
I think it was Low in Montreux. And after that, it wasn’t totally fixed, but
the idea was to continue the collaboration, and he would return, and because
those blank tapes were now filled with music, he took the tapes along, and
that was the end of what I saw of the tapes. Time went on. I had released
Flammende Herzen, my first solo album, and was totally shocked by the
enormous success, because I was used to people ignoring the music. Harmonia
was a total failure, commercial disaster.
Hanna Bächer 
For how many people did you play?
Michael Rother 
Sometimes, there was this one occasion, which just tells you, there weren’t
any promoters, or hardly any promoters, who wanted to give us a fixed sum, and
so we had this venue in Northern Germany, and it was a discotheque, and the
guy said, “Okay, you can play and take a percentage of the doors,” and then
three people showed up. [laughs]
Hanna Bächer 
How many percent did you get?
Michael Rother 
I mean, now we can laugh, I can laugh, but at the time, it wasn’t funny at all
because we had to repair the car. That was so much pressure. Harmonia was
really a commercial disaster. Artistically, it was vital for my education, for
my idea of developing the music, and I could not have recorded things that I
did on Neu! ’75 or my solo albums without that collaboration, I’m quite sure
about that. But this lack of success and lack of money in the end, made the
quarrels which we had… We had artistic struggles, of course, because we were
all three very different in personality and what we stood for, but for a while
we just got together which led to great music. If you can’t pay the repairs
for the car, etcetera, so after three years in summer of ’76, we decided to record
solo albums and leave the project.
Hanna Bächer 
This was also more or less the same time that Neu! disbanded as well after
Neu! ’75, right?
Michael Rother 
Yeah, I tried to make a distinction. Neu! never disbanded, really. Neu! was
not a band like Harmonia. Neu! was whenever Klaus Dinger and I worked
together. It’s an important distinction, really, to make, and so people tell
me, “Oh, so you disbanded?” I always have to contradict and say, “No, we just
stopped working together for a while.” And when I left Düsseldorf to start
Harmonia, it was not that, “Okay, now I will never see Klaus again.” It was
just, “I have to concentrate on this fascinating project,” and then one-
and-a-half years later, we recorded Neu! ’75, which I wouldn’t want to miss
in my biography.
Hanna Bächer 
Should we listen to “Hero”? Is that a good song to…? Well, it’s certainly one
of the most known Neu! songs from Neu! ’75.
Michael Rother 
OK! Give it a blast.
(music: Neu! – “Hero” / applause)
Thank you, especially for Klaus, I guess. This was, I guess, one of the best
examples of his creativity, his ability to express his emotions. He was very
frustrated, very angry at the time, and I never shared those emotions, but I
really appreciate and absolutely love the dynamics of that song, this rushing
forward and stomping through the night. I have a very clear memory of the
situation when Klaus went into the recording studio to do the vocals. I was
sitting with Conny Plank at the mixing desk, and Klaus belted out these words,
and we both knew this was the take, the first take. Klaus tried to record a
second take, actually he did, tried to improve this vocal track.
Hanna Bächer 
What is he saying?
Michael Rother 
Oh, what’s the story? I think has girlfriend went away with her family back to
Norway. It’s, “Back to Norway,” it’s not, “Back to nowhere.” Sometimes people
misunderstood that. He was angry at the record company, “Fu-- the program,
Fu-- the company, Fu-- the press.” That was Klaus. Sometimes it’s one way of
dealing with reality or with opposition. I never shared that approach. I have
a very different attitude to deal with opposition or with unfortunate
situations, but Klaus drew creativity from his anger. It’s one of my favorite
Neu! tracks of all, really. I think it’s a very clear and true expression.
Hanna Bächer 
The solo stuff you started working on during that time, it’s the furthest
away from this kind of like proto-punk or whatever you did with Neu!. I can’t
quite understand how you could have the two very, very different energies at
once. I mean, your first solo record is called Flammende Herzen, which
translates to “burning hearts.”
Michael Rother 
Yes. In a sense that you’re in love and you have strong emotions, which I had.
My girlfriend was far away at the time, and somehow that melody came, just
flew out of me, came out of me. For me, it’s totally natural. I don’t limit
myself. I enjoy abstract music, I enjoy very rhythmical music, and also very
melodic, harmonious music. This is all within the range of my musical
expression, and I enjoy running forward, like playing soccer very fast,
rushing to the horizon, and then also creating very soft and gentle music.
That’s not a contradiction for me at all. It’s just all there.
Hanna Bächer 
Was there a sense of irony even involved in calling the record Flammende
Herzen, or humor, or was it a straightforward appreciation of your feelings?
Michael Rother 
I know what you’re trying to say. You cannot translate it directly. It is, in
a way, self-ironical, of course. The story behind that title is, I had this…
What’s the English word for Scheerenschnitt? Something you only see in a silhouette, and that was some historic…
Hanna Bächer 
Cut-out.
Michael Rother 
Cut-out, yes, of maybe Jugendstil, [Art Noveau], and it was in my building. It
was given to me by a neighbor, and it had flammende Herzen. It’s a flower,
actually, in Germany called Tränendes Herz, like “crying heart.” I’m not
sure if you have that flower in Japan, well, we’re not talking about Japan.
We’re talking about the whole world. And I knew, of course, this is something
that will probably confuse people because it was not cool, of course. It was
quite the opposite of being cool, it was… But I didn’t care. I chose the title, and I
remember the guy of the record company, the label that released my first solo
album, Sky Records, he gulped at first, and he said, “Oh well, titles do not
matter anyway.” [laughs]
Hanna Bächer 
It did sell many, many copies. Here’s a track, and it’s with Jaki Liebezeit of
Can on drums.
(music: Michael Rother – “Flammende Herzen”)
[comments] Sorry, I need to fast-forward to his drums.
Michael Rother 
This was without Jaki, but actually, in the background… Yeah, okay.
[music continues / applause]
Jaki Liebezeit is a wonderful drummer. I guess most of you will know him. He’s
just a pure magician at the drums. He didn’t need any rehearsing. We just went
into the recording studio. I played guitar, and he picked up my intentions of
drama, of moving on from the parts, and he just joined in and added some
really wonderful drumming to that track, especially to “Flammende Herzen.”
Amazing drummer, Jaki Liebezeit, still today.
Hanna Bächer 
That’s true. This was your very first solo recording, so it’s in ’77, and
basically when I look at, well, the many quite successful solo recordings that
you did, there’s a time before Fairlight and a time after Fairlight. And I
think, funny enough, Marley Marl has mentioned the Fairlight music computer here the other day. But I suppose most people don’t know what it looks like, so I might show a little
video where it gets introduced from 1980.
[video: Fairlight demo]
“For three days, this display center at Center Point was filled with silicon
chips and floppy disks and liquid crystal display units. Now, for my money,
the star of the show was this, the Fairlight computer musical instrument. It’s
$26,000 worth of electronic wizardry that’s been developed over the last five
years by Kim Ryrie and Peter Vogel. Peter, show us the amazing things it can
do.”
“Well, here we’re using a computer to actually generate the sounds that we
hear, so instead of having vibrating strings or air controlled sound in
conventional instruments, the computer generates the sound that we want, so
the important thing is the ease with which the musician can define through the
computer and this is just the sort of sound it was made for. Now, to make that
easy, we’ve created a light pen system through this device here that allows
you to draw directly on this television screen the harmonic curves of our
sound.”
“Now, this is the picture of a sound. That’s what the sound looks like through
the computer so that we know what the sound the computer’s thinking about.
Would you like to show us what sound that is?”
“Well, this particular spectrum sounds like this.” [musical chords]
“Right, well, how does a composer work with the CMI Fairlight translator?”
“Well, I might select to change one of these harmonics, taking the fifth
harmonic here, and I’m just working on that curve on its own, drawing a new
one, so now that curve swells up towards here in there, and I’ll make the tenth
harmonic through a similar sort of thing. And when I hit the compute command
here, the computer’s now thinking about the curves I’m drawing here and
calculating the sound that it fed into spectrum analyzer, would look like
that, and now that sound would be different.” 
[musical chords]
“Depending on how my harmonics are growing in the direction of the sound.”
“That’s the kind of experimentation that a composer would engage in, but if he
wanted a particular sound, the sound of a church bell or a trumpet or a
violin, what does he do?”
“Well, in those circumstances, we can simply plug the microphone into the
machine and tell it, ‘Okay, computer, here’s a sample of a sound that I want.
See what you can do with it.’ For example, with the human voice, we can say:
blah! There’s the picture of that blah.”
“So that’s the track of that, and you can then put that through the unit?”
[computerized “blahs”]
“That’s rather cute, isn’t it?”
“What about natural sound if you want to get the sound of…”
Hanna Bächer 
Okay, let’s stop that here. It goes on like this, but you can look it up
yourself if you want. I quite like that he says, “This is how the computer
thinks the sounds look like,” or something with the computer.
Michael Rother 
I haven’t seen this before. It looks a bit like Monty Python even.
[laughter]
Hanna Bächer 
It’s all Monty Python for you.
Michael Rother 
OK, should I tell the story about how I discovered that world, or do you
want to hear anything else?
Hanna Bächer 
If you’d like to.
Michael Rother 
Okay. I was at a film festival in 1982 with a short film, and I went to see a
film I didn’t know anything about. It was called Liquid Sky. Does anybody
know that film? Yeah, very special film. I remember sitting in the dark room
and not believing what I was hearing. The film was very crazy, but the music
consisted of sounds I had never heard before, and so when I returned to
Germany, I tried to find out where those sounds came from, how could you
create those sounds? And… I ended up in Munich. There was the German dealer of
Fairlight systems, and so I drove down to Munich and bought that unit, which
actually cost a lot more than $27,000, although I don’t know what the exchange
rate was at the time. It cost a fortune, it was impossible. You could buy a
house at the time for that money. But because before that technology was
available, there was no possibility for me to write music in the sense that I
could make a machine play it, play the sounds, the melodies, the beats, etcetera,
and also to add natural instruments, not “blah-blah” but like, orchestral
sounds. By the way, the sampling rate was 8-bit, and it sounded like a dustbin, looking back now. Of course, it is something that has a cult following. Everything sounds pure and great. 8-bit is suddenly interesting again. Maybe I should dust it and try to get it running again. I still have it in my
studio, and it inspired me to, at least on two albums, to… I spent months just learning how to use that instrument. The guy already mentioned some software, which you had to buy separately. One was called Music Composition Language. I
think Harold Faltermeyer might have mentioned that. You had to enter all the data and
semicolon, brackets, semi-brackets, the round brackets, and everything meant
something different, and for each note, for each single note, how long it
should last, how loud it should be, etc. That, of course, took a lot of
concentration and fun. You had to be excited about the possibilities to spend
hours and days writing that mathematical stuff, and then some of the best
things happened when I made some mistakes programming. When I played back,
suddenly something completely different happened, and I thought, “Whoa, this
is even better.” That was the result of programming on the Fairlight.
Hanna Bächer 
Shall we listen to a bit. This is “Palmengarten.”
(music: Michael Rother – “Palmengarten” / applause) 
Michael Rother 
Thank you.
Hanna Bächer 
Doesn’t sound much like semicolons.
Michael Rother 
Yeah, of course. That was just the way to do it. It was still emotional, and
it was a complex thing, and because of the perfection on one side, I made sure
that I added enough handmade music, like played my guitar, which of course had
all the errors, slight errors and inaccuracies, and the combination, I think,
worked quite well. You can tell me if you like it or not, but you don’t have
to. [laughs]
Hanna Bächer 
I’m actually quite into it, in all honesty.
Michael Rother 
Well, the funny thing is, just a few days ago, I got an email from my friend
Aaron Mullen of Tall Firs in New York, and Steve Shelley had written him,
“Hey, have a look at this, Iggy Pop played “Palmengarten” and two other
Michael Rother tracks on his BBC playlist.” Iggy Pop, of all people. You know
Iggy Pop? Yeah, OK.
[laughter]
Hanna Bächer 
How did you feel when [Ciccone Youth] released this “Two Cool Rock Chicks
Listening to Neu!”? I think it was ’88.
Michael Rother 
Was it ’88?
Hanna Bächer 
I think so.
Michael Rother 
I probably didn’t hear about it until a few years later. I didn’t know the
band, and I think, “Hmm, that’s strange,” but that was the time. I mean, we
don’t have enough time to go into all these details, but in the ‘80s, Neu! was
completely gone. Nobody was interested in Neu!, Harmonia was gone all the
time, and so the echo came from abroad, from people like Stereolab, who
sounded a bit like Neu! and also Can and were very successful with that sound,
and also people like Sonic Youth. Of course, David Bowie later, or maybe even
earlier, he mentioned that he especially liked “Hero” and “After Eight,” and I
guess we didn’t mention that, that he wanted me to play on his album in
Berlin, which mysteriously didn’t happen, but we don’t have the time now to go
into all that anyway. Yeah?
Audience Member 
[inaudible]
Hanna Bächer 
It’s, all right, for you especially. [laughs] I already mentioned that Brian
Eno came to visit us, and we worked together, and then I think he produced
David Bowie’s albums then. Anyway, I wasn’t surprised when [the] next year, in
summer, I got a telephone call by someone asking me, “David Bowie would like
you to join him in the studio to record his album. Would you be interested?”
Then I said, “Okay, yeah, that sounds nice. I would like to talk to David, of
course, about the details.” David and I chatted for a long time. We were
totally excited, talking about details, instruments and so on. Then, the next
person to call me was one of his management. I think I surprised them. The
English always were very professional, and I was a hippie sort of and not very
professional thinking. I was just into music, and I told the guy, “Well, as
long as the music is great, don’t worry about money. We will solve that
later.” I think that was an answer that really frightened that manager. He
would have liked me to say, “I need this amount and then I will sign it, and
you will have no problems.” In a way, I understand that, but then also there
was, in the background, which was revealed much later that his sales were
going down. The Berlin period, which for quite a while now is in high esteem,
most people think that that was his most creative period… But at the time, the
fans were not happy with his development, they didn’t follow him, so the sales
were dropping, dropping, dropping, and I guess the management decided that it
was a very bad idea to invite another one of these crazy German
experimentalists who might even have evil influence on the music. [laughs]
So the next thing that happened was that I read that in David Bowie’s
interviews later, 2000 or 2002 in Uncut magazine in England when he said, “Oh,
I invited Michael Rother, and unfortunately, he turned me down.” I was told
David had changed his mind. Someone, a guy in the middle, made the decisions
for us and prevented that collaboration from happening. So, that was the David
Bowie story in the short, my version.
[laughter / applause]
Hanna Bächer 
Shall we give it up to questions, if there are any?
Audience Member 
That was already the first question.
Hanna Bächer 
That was already the first question. You broke the ice.
Michael Rother 
May I just add some information, because we somehow steered away from that.
Brian Eno went away with the tapes. The tapes were considered lost for quite a
while. Ten years later, or 15 years later, we always remember that phase,
which was very creative, and I had a small tape with rough mixes I had done
before he left with the originals on my cassette. Then, Roedelius visited
Brian Eno in London and with his permission looked in Brian’s archives and
came up with one or two of the tapes, and so we could release Harmonia &
Eno Tracks & Traces. That was the first version, and the current
version, which is on Grönland Records, features three additional tracks, which
I found on my cassette, which had so many sketches that were worth showing,
and so I was really happy that we could do these additional tracks to that
album as a document to that collaboration. 
Audience Member 
So initially, why didn’t it come out?
Hanna Bächer 
I don’t know. Things just, everyone took a different direction. I guess David
was… I don’t want to be unfair. Maybe he was happy with having picked up the
inspiration from our collaboration, and he was not bent on releasing anything,
so it was just put onto a shelf. I was very busy recording my solo albums,
which as you already said, really were so wonderfully successful that I could
buy my own studio gear in ’79, and I didn’t think about it for quite a few
years. But it was always in the back of my mind, like, also one recording
Harmonia did, a live recording, which rested in my archive for maybe 35 years.
We agreed that… We already mentioned that we were poor, and blank tapes was so unbelievably expensive for Revox tape machines, so we had to erase all the time. Everything that was not totally convincing was erased and used again, but this one live
recording from 1974 was left untouched because we all knew that was something
special. It was probably the best live concert, the best concert Harmonia ever
did. That came out on Grönland as well in, I think, 2007 maybe. Harmonia Live
1974, which is a great document, in my view, and it adds some more elements,
some colors to the catalog of Harmonia.
Hanna Bächer 
Shall we listen to a… Oh, there’s another question.
Audience Member 
I think that was actually my question. You said a bit about that you were
working on a play right now or musical, and I was wondering if you had
something completely… Didn’t you say that? Oh, was that the last? Oh, that’s
right. Okay, well, then you didn’t say anything about it.
Michael Rother 
Well, I’m going to Hollywood. [laughs]
Audience Member 
Oh, sorry, I was just like…
Hanna Bächer 
It’s about time. You’re the right age.
Michael Rother 
[laughs]
Audience Member 
Then we did not talk about this. Do you have anything completely fresh or new
stuff you’re working on that we could hear?
Michael Rother 
We will hear, at the end, I think, after we finish talking, we will hear a
remix I did recently for a British band, which I rather like and people seem
to appreciate very much, which will be out in the near future. Then there’s
also a documentary about my work, my person. A photographer from Germany has
been following me and us to the concerts in the last months, and he has tons
of footage, and we want to go through that when I get back to Germany. There’s
so much work waiting. Time is always limited, although I have so much time,
but being also… I started a record label, my own record label in ’93, when no company
wanted to touch my music. [laughs] In the end, I was so frustrated after
endless discussions with record labels, with people from record companies who,
in the beginning, there was always someone who was excited, but in the end,
the marketing people, there was always a negative decision. And so in ’93,
that was hard work for a musician without any experience, but I just decided
to release my music on my own label. Anyway, then I have to take care of so
many things. It’s carrying my history around me, which has, of course,
benefits, but also there’s a lot of work to do. I mean, Neu! is always in
discussion. Harmonia, we’re talking about releasing a box set of Harmonia.
There’s always something to decide for Neu!, which is requests for usage in
films, etc. So, busy times, but I’m not complaining, really.
Audience Member 
I have one more question. We were talking about how fast it was to make
music back then because you were just limited with time or like just
equipment. How productive are you now? How long did it take you to do this
remix that you’re going to play for us?
Michael Rother 
I think that happened quite fast, actually. The people who asked me to do the
remix were surprised that I haven’t done remixes before. Actually, I did one
for Paul Weller, but that wasn’t released because in the end, we couldn’t
agree on the version somehow. But he approached me recently again and asked
whether I could do some production for him, but I was busy with that other
project at the time, so I had to turn him down. With that “Boxed In” remix,
when they sent me that piece of music, there was a lot in the track, to be
quite honest, which I didn’t like, but there was something in the feeling and
the vocals which appealed to me. And I had this idea I could do something, and so
I had all the liberties, and I just left out maybe 80% and just took the drums
and the vocals and added my own guitars, and then I was very happy. I just
recorded every guitar only once, just to give you an idea. I didn’t edit
anything. I just did four or five or six guitars just one after the other, and
then that was it.
Audience Member 
So like a day?
Michael Rother 
Well, I did work longer, to be honest. First, you get all the tracks, and then
you have to copy them to your computer, and then you have to analyze them, so
that does take longer than a day. But the process, like I said, the real
creative process like recording my guitars, new melodies, etcetera, that was just
a very spontaneous process, and I was happy about that. Whenever I have the
chance, I prefer to do a recording only once. I don’t always succeed, but most
of you will understand what I mean. It has a special magic, the first
recording, with all the errors, etcetera, and the inaccuracies.
Hanna Bächer 
Shall we maybe, before we listen to the remix, quickly listen to this clip of
you playing at ATP [Festival] because I think it’s quite interesting how you
sound like live at the moment. It’s a bit bad quality, so…
[video: Michael Rother live @ ATP Festival]
What you’re doing here is mostly mixing and playing sounds?
Michael Rother 
Actually, I have to first tell you where that music comes from. That is a
track from Harmonia Live 1974, which I, of course, changed and added new
instruments. The audio is, of course, terrible. It’s just a document. Some fan
did a video and put it on YouTube. The musicians are the band Kamera.
Actually, you only see the drummer. He plays standing up, and on the right,
it’s my friend Aaron Mullen on bass, who played on “Hallogallo” in 2010. Next
year, if I manage to do the US tour, which I’m discussing with agents, he’ll
be part of the team. Yeah, that was ATP 2012. Last year, I played with a
different lineup at ATP. Actually, do you know ATP, have you heard of All
Tomorrow’s Parties? Yeah. It was a wonderful series of concerts. Barry Hogan
and his partner, Deborah Kee Higgins, invited me for the first time in 2005 to
play, and Josh Klinghoffer, who’s now with the [Red Hot] Chili Peppers, joined me. My
friend Ben Curtis, who unfortunately passed away last year, who became quite
well-known first with Secret Machines and then with School of Seven Bells,
wonderful music. Later on, I played for ATP in other countries, in Australia,
America, Spain, with Harmonia even and also “Hallogallo” and with my project,
Michael Rother Performs the Music of Neu! and Harmonia and selected Blah-Blah-
Blahs, very short title. Anyway, unfortunately, they lost too much money, and
so they had to stop ATP. It was the final edition I played on. Quite a few
tears were spent there by the team. Lovely people. I really liked the whole
family and the idea behind that kind of festival; not ripping off the people
and the musicians and the festival-goers, living more or less together on a
campsite and meeting, very casual. Yeah, I hope they manage to survive with
the new activities. It would be a real shame to lose people of that type, not
only the money-making people. I mean, obviously, money was always involved,
but it was not at the heart of the matter, and that’s very important. That’s
what we had in common. I guess I don’t mind making money, but it should never
be the main reason for what you do. Otherwise, you lose the magic, the idea.
Hanna Bächer 
Talking about meeting, you’ll be around until Friday morning. You’ll be in the
building here tomorrow if anyone wants to approach you.
Michael Rother 
Yeah, just talk to me. [sings] Just talk to me.
Hanna Bächer 
If there are no more questions, I will go into that remix that is yet
unreleased, so we play it right at the end of our thing just for you.
Michael Rother 
Yeah.
Audience Member 
When you did the remixes, when you were asked or commissioned to do the
remixes after you did the reissue in 2009, when Grönland put out Tracks &
Traces, you commissioned like people like Shackleton to do remixes.
Michael Rother 
Oh yeah.
Audience Member 
Was it your decision? Was it the labels decision? Do you like Shackleton, the
other people that were involved in those remixes?
Michael Rother 
The remixers were chosen by Grönland, and we were asked whether we accepted
the remixes for release. That was the way it was handled. To be honest, I
don’t even know those names. I’m really the worst-informed guy you can
imagine, always too busy with my own stuff.
Audience Member 
Just out of curiosity, what contemporary bands or music do you listen to?
Because I listen to your music, so I just want to know what you listen to.
Michael Rother 
Bach. Does that count? [laughs]
Audience Member 
I don’t know if that fits.
Michael Rother 
Django Reinhardt. No, contemporary… I do not spend too much time listening to music, other people’s music, to be quite honest. I have to concentrate, and sometimes I
stumble upon things that I really like. For instance, the Fu-- Buttons, we
played at the same festival in Poland in August, and I’m friends with those
two guys. They are wonderful people, and they blew me away every time when I
see them live. I think you have to see the Fu-- Buttons live, and it’s
amazing.
Audience Member 
Thank you for speaking. It means a lot.
Michael Rother 
Thank you! For listening. I hope something made sense. 
[applause]
