David Kennedy’s unique amalgamation of dubstep, house, garage and techno has made him one of the UK’s most talked about and forward-thinking producers, both as his earlier alias of Ramadanman and as Pearson Sound . His talents have earned him a FabricLive release in 2011, as well as singles on Hemlock and Swamp 81 to add to those on his own Hessle Audio imprint. 
In his 2011 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, he reflects on dubstep’s growth and transformation.
Benji B 
Please make
him welcome, Mr Pearson Sound! [applause] 
Pearson Sound 
Thank you. 
Benji B 
How are you feeling, David? 
Pearson Sound 
Pretty good – well rested. 
Benji B 
So I think the best way to dust off the cobwebs from last night, and also to
introduce your sound for people in the room that might not be familiar with
your music, is to play a record. I think we should get an idea of the kind of music you make at the moment, and play something current. What’s this? 
Pearson Sound 
This is a track called “Glut,” which came out last year. 
Benji B 
Alright, let’s listen to this nice and loud please. Over there, hello! 
(music: Ramadanman – “Glut” / applause) 
Benji B 
So is that a very current release? 
Pearson Sound 
I guess that’s about a year old now. But yeah, it’s one of the tunes that
got popular last year, so I thought I’d play this one because you can never
assume what people have heard or what people know about. 
Benji B 
Yeah, absolutely. And with that in mind, can you maybe introduce yourself and
let us know who you are and where you’re from? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, my name is David Kennedy. I make music under quite a few names, such as
Pearson Sound, Ramadanman, Maurice Donovan and several others. I
live in London, I’m from London, I lived in Leeds for a bit, and I co-run a
record label called Hessle Audio and I also DJ. 
Benji B 
You’re DJing quite a lot at the moment. I think that it’s fair to say that the
last year has been a very successful year for you as a DJ. Do you want to tell
us about your schedule currently? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, it’s got a lot busier. I’ve been DJing for as long as I’ve been
making music, so it’s great and I’m getting to travel all over the world. Last
month I was everywhere, from Mexico to Germany to Brussels, all across
Europe and fortunate enough to go to Asia and America and other continents,
which is really cool. Things are really busy. DJing is obviously the
thing that takes up most of your time because of the travelling aspect, so I’m
mainly busy with that right now. 
Benji B 
And are you enjoying yourself? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, definitely. I think it’s quite easy to get a bit run down sometimes. Like last month I just hit it a bit hard in terms of taking on too many shows, and ended up being ill for three weeks solidly, I just couldn’t shake it. So, I’m enjoying it until I just get too busy for my good. 
Benji B 
We heard in Scuba’s lecture yesterday about the difficulty between running a
record label, making tunes and DJing as well – how do you strike that
balance? 
Pearson Sound 
At the moment it’s quite difficult, really. I mean, the way I’ve always done it is by
not really spending whole days in the studio. I’ll take it in little chunks,
so I’ve never really had a problem in that respect. But this year especially,
you might be DJing on a Friday and Saturday, and you get home on a Sunday and
you don’t really feel like doing anything on a Monday. Tuesday, you
might answer a few emails and Wednesday you might wrote some music, and it all
starts again on Thursday. So you know, it can be a bit of a squeeze for time,
and airports aren’t the most inspiring of places. But I’m always thankful, and
I think that’s always important. You can never get complacent. Like when you see DJs
complaining on Twitter about having to travel for four hours somewhere, it’s
like, you’ve got to realize how fortunate you are at the same time.
Benji B 
Now, over the last week we’ve been lucky enough to hear from people like Nile Rodgers and Trevor Horn about selling millions of records, and
the good old days of people buying physical products and so on. Is it fair to
say that for your generation the reality is that, putting out a record like
“Glut” is creatively fulfilling for you, but is also basically a business card
for your DJing services, and that’s where your touring income comes from? Is
that the reality for the young producer/DJ now? 
Pearson Sound 
Being only 23, I never really saw the days where producers would sell 20,000
singles or whatever. Well, even that was not that much for the biggest tunes.
But I never really saw the days when dance music made ridiculous
amounts of money. So the way I’ve experienced it is that, obviously you do
make some money from releases, especially if they do well. But in reality in terms of income, DJing is more lucrative, because to make a tune it might take weeks, whereas to DJ it takes one night. So, yeah, the industry has definitely changed in that respect and I think that definitely affects things. Like, you
see producers who have made one big tune and they’re DJing all around the
world. Which is cool, but it’s almost unfair to have that pressure to perform
if you don’t want to. I mean, you look at someone like Burial, he’s never done
any kind of live thing, and he’s sort of stuck to it in that respect even
though he probably could have toured the world ten times over. So, yeah, I
think at the moment there’s this slightly weird thing where everyone is
expected to do a live show or to DJ, which is a bit strange if it’s not what
you want to do. 
Benji B 
When you’re DJing around the world, how is that informing the music that
you’re making? And further to that, as your venues get bigger, do you feel a
pressure to make sort of big-room records? Is your DJing really informing
the tunes that you’re writing right now? 
Pearson Sound 
Well, there’s obviously a danger, and I suppose we’ll probably talk about it
later on, in terms of the dubstep scene being part of my theory of how things
went. If you saw Scuba’s lecture, he didn’t go too far into that discussion,
but as the music became more popular, obviously venues got bigger, crowds got
bigger, crowds got more impatient. I think the smoking ban – in England,
smoking in nightclubs was banned in about 2008, 2009 – and its effect meant
that DJs feel like they have to work harder to keep people in the room to
avoid them going for a cigarette, so music gets harder and faster and a bit
more in your face to try and keep people there. But personally, I think, if
you’re playing a festival to 10,000 people, you have to keep it in mind,
because there’s a lot less subtlety onstage with such a big audience. I think
it’s about compromising not too much. You’ve got to realize as well, with
10,000 people about 60% of them will have no idea who you are and no idea
about the music you play. You can drop some of the bigger tunes, which maybe,
if you were playing to 100 people in London, you would never play. And that’s
not a bad thing, if it’s a good tune it’s a good tune, regardless. So, the kind
of venues you play does inform how you DJ, and I
think it’s important to keep that in mind. And as long as you’re happy with
what you’re doing. If you’re purposely like, “Oh, I don’t really like this
tune but I know it will get a good reaction,” I think that’s when there might be a problem. 
Benji B 
So what was the period of musical innocence for you when you were devoid of
any of those pressures or influences or things around you? What was the time
when you first started making music for the sake of making music? 
Pearson Sound
Well, I had piano lessons when I was young, and I stopped doing it
when I was about 12 or 13, because it sort of became uncool. I remember that my
piano teacher at school would always get really frustrated with me because
instead of reading the music, I would memorize how it sounded and play it from
memory rather than sight reading. That always frustrated her, so we ended up
doing jazz piano, where in each composition you’d have a few bars where you do
a little noodle and you could do whatever you want. So, I enjoyed that more.
Then eventually I stopped those lessons, and at the time I had an electronic
keyboard, like a lot of kids, and I would make recordings to tape. I’d make my
own silly little radio shows and stuff like that, and eventually I got to use computers, and it
sort of happened from there, really. I just started using
FruityLoops in 2001, and I’ve been using it ever since. So, it was quite a natural progression from
using little keyboards and tape recorders to eventually using this really
budget version of this other software. And because it was a demo you couldn’t
save it, so after school I’d spend a couple of hours making a tune, then my
parents would get home and I’d have to quickly bounce it out by recording it
live. You couldn’t save anything, so it was very innocent in that respect. It
was a lot more creative, I guess. 
Benji B 
So, what was the age where you first came into contact with music technology? 
Pearson Sound 
I think it was probably around when I was eight or nine. I’m lucky that I’m
young enough to have grown up with the technology and grew up with the internet, so I’m
fortunate in that respect. I’ve always been using it, and in school it was
drummed into you, in IT lessons and stuff like that, so I’ve been using
computers from an early age. Using software for ten years means that you know
it very well. Like, when I use a program like
Logic or something I’m unfamiliar
with, I waste so much time, just trying to find out something really simple,
whereas if I’ve been using a software for that many years, it’s very
instinctive. It becomes very logical from your point of view, because you can
do what you want, and express yourself a lot more quickly, rather having to
worry about how to just draw in the note. With FruityLoops I can do it just
like that. 
Benji B 
What sort of music were you making in your early teens? Have you got anything
with you? 
Pearson Sound
Yeah. I was saying yesterday, that there is this funny story. There was
this physics technician at my school, and we found out that he was into
electronic music. I think I found him one day making jungle music after school
in the science labs or something, so we got chatting, and I told him that I
made music too. So, I made him a CD complete with a massive page of
notes describing what each tune was about and influenced by. Anyway, last
month I just got this email in my inbox from the same guy, and he was like, “Oh, I just found this CD, rummaging through my stuff.” And he ripped it for me
and it’s quite funny really. I mean, I had a few of the tunes, but there were
a few tunes there that I had lost on my computer. So, it’s quite a nice little
insight into the mind of a 14-year-old just pressing buttons on a computer.
It’s nice, because back then we weren’t really making music for anyone. I
didn’t send it to anyone. You’d play it to a few friends or whatever, but you
wouldn’t send it to DJs. It’s quite refreshing in a way, because now, as soon
as you make something, it’s out there. As soon as you play it on a radio show
and people are listening because you now have an audience. I don’t regret that fact
because it’s a natural progression, but I still really like the music I made
at that age because it was just a lot more innocent, I think. 
Benji B 
So clearly, at 14, if you were going to clubs you probably weren’t supposed to
be, but I imagine you weren’t yet. And you were making sort of tear-out drum
& bass tunes. Where did that influence come from? Was it the radio or what?
Pearson Sound 
I listened to a lot of pirate radio. In London, it was everywhere. You’d try
and tune into Radio 1, and you’d have all these other frequencies a couple of
notches away on the spectrum, and you’d hear all this different music. There
was definitely some I remember, like there was this one called Rude FM which still exists today, it was
a drum & bass and jungle station. I could get that where I lived. And there
was one called Itch FM, which was a really cool hip-hop station. The thing about
pirate radio, because it’s so transient, is that a station could get shut down
or raided while you were listening to it. So, I used to listen to Itch FM a
lot, and then one day, I tried to tune in and it disappeared and I don’t think
it ever came back. I’m sure you know more about that whole story than me, but
that was quite cool in a way. You’d lock into a station and maybe never even
find out the name, and I’d just make these recordings of all this pirate radio
stuff, which I’ve still got in my archives somewhere. But anyway, I wasn’t
going to clubs when I was 14, because I looked about eight or something like
that. So, my first clubbing experience was going to a night called
FWD>> in east London, which
Scuba talked about a bit yesterday. But I don’t think you can ever talk too
much about FWD>>. I mean, apart from going to a couple of rubbish West
End clubs with some mates, around that time, FWD>> was my first clubbing
experience. I guess there’s not really a better way to get introduced to music
on soundsystems. 
Benji B 
FWD>> had presumably moved to Plastic People by the time you were playing there? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, it was FWD>> at Plastic People on a Thursday night, and because I
was still at school, I think I was 17. I could only go in the holidays because
I couldn’t go out in the week. So I went down one half term on my own because
that was sort of the “done thing” in the dubstep scene because no one else was
into that music. So yeah, I went down on my own and had such an
amazing night and definitely would say – that cliché – that it changed my
life. 
Benji B 
Yeah, I was gonna say, everyone in the room that’s a DJ or music-lover has
that moment or that period in their life where they really fall in love with
club culture, or they have their moment in a club or whatever. Would you say
FWD>> was that moment for you? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, you heard the tune I just played, it doesn’t really
have any bass on it. I didn’t really know bass existed until I went to a
proper club. I didn’t realize there was this spectrum of frequencies that I
was just missing, that I didn’t know existed. I didn’t know to put it in my
music, so I think that was the most immediate thing that changed when I went
to FWD>> – it completely changed the way I made music. I was like, “This
is what it can sound like, you can have your nose rattled, you can have your
eyes shaking.” I mean, Plastic People is a tiny club – they changed the layout
recently, but a few years back there used to be little nooks and crannies that
you could go and sit in, and they’d sort of amplify the bass. It was a very
intense physical experience, and for a 17-year-old there, it was completely
crazy, really. This was when you could smoke there, too, so you’d have this
smoke-filled room with lots of incredibly loud music, and lots of guys with
hoods up, looking moody. Yeah, it was a very formative time. 
Benji B 
A lot has been spoken about that club and that club night, obviously. But for
people that are here from outside the UK or can’t really get an idea of the
texture of what it sounded like, is there a record that you could play that
sums up those early FWD>>; days? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah. I went to FWD>> quite a lot. I mean I wasn’t a regular, it was
every couple of weeks. I’m in two minds; I think I might play this
Caspa tune, because the
first time I went to FWD>> I met Ben UFO there, he was standing
outside. We’ll probably get onto that in a bit, but I remember the first
FWD>> I went to,
Mala
was playing from Digital Mystikz, N-Type was also playing, and I think,
Geeneus. I remember, I was hanging out
with Ben, and he was a lot more immersed in the scene at that point than I
was, and he was telling me, “Oh, there’s this new producer called Caspa, no
one knows who he is, he’s a mysterious producer,” and N-Type had all these new
Caspa dubs. I’m pretty sure this tune got played the first time I was there,
so I thought it might be appropriate to play it. For those who don’t know,
Caspa is a producer from west London. 
(music: Caspa – “For the Kids”)
Pearson Sound 
A tune like that has just got this real intensity, if you imagine it on a
soundsystem six times this size, and each one of those bass stabs just
oppressing you. It was just an experience that I’d never really had. And I
mean, I probably could have played any number of tunes to sum up FWD>>,
but that one just stuck in my mind as I was having a look last night. 
Benji B 
Apart from the physical element of the bass and the soundsystem, there’s also
the personal element of the people you meet there, in terms of the fertile
meeting ground of like-minded DJs and producers and fans of the night. 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, I mean Scuba was saying, he was at the very first FWD>> in 2001,
but the way he saw it was people coming down and swapping CDs, and coming down
once a month to a club where people would come and hang out. And although the
first one I went to was in 2006, there was still very much that same vibe. The
scene had grown, but sometimes there’d only be 30 people there, and sometimes
there would be 100 but it was never really that busy. And because it was every
two weeks, people would make an effort to come down. There would be people who
had work at 8 AM the next morning, but they still came down, and you’d see the
same familiar faces every week. There was this really nice personal sense of
community. There could only have been about a couple of thousand people who
were actually into the music in the whole world, pretty much, so you felt like
you were part of something. If you overheard someone talking about dubstep in
the street, you’d go up to them and you’d probably know them somehow. It was
this very strange community and obviously it grew very quickly. But for the couple of years that I experienced it, there were a lot of familiar
faces at the nights. There was always people there that had something to do
with the scene, be it a producer, a DJ, maybe having a radio show, a blog,
everyone did something. There weren’t a lot of people who were just punters. Most people had some sort of involvement in the scene, and I think that’s what
made it pretty special. The internet was around, and it did have a very
important hand in developing the scene, but the way I remember it
is a lot more about the people – this group of people who are now off
doing all sorts of things, but we all came from a very similar place. 
Benji B 
Clearly, you met Ben UFO and
Pangaea there, who go on to do
Hessle Records, and we should certainly talk about that in a bit. But do you
want to give us an idea of some of the other producers who are now quote/unquote
household names that you might have met down there? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, apart from FWD>> there was this other night called the Red Star,
which I was quite involved in and played at from time to time. It was down in
Camberwell, in south London, and I don’t think a lot of people have really
talked about it, there’s never really anything written, but it was sort of
this weekly night similar to FWD>>. It was set up in a similar vibe to
FWD>>; and that was where, as the music became more popular and
FWD>> got busier, a lot of people started going to that. I think it was even on
the same night as FWD>>, which is a bit controversial. In terms of the
people involved, it was pretty much everyone who lived in London, to be
honest, everyone from Bok Bok who runs Night Slugs, even Skream
would just pop down just for fun with his mates. They’d all drive up from
south London to come down, there was just loads of people who are now doing
really cool stuff. Everyone from
Ikonika to a lot of people
who I’ve released on my label, like Untold. There were a lot of people who
were involved in that who now are maybe really successful DJs. There were even
people who you used to see a lot, but I’ve now sort of lost touch with,
which is a sort of a shame. But everyone’s off doing different things. Some people are off traveling the world DJing, some people have lost interest in music and are now doing something completely different. But it’s just
quite interesting to see where everyone’s gone, even though we all were in
that sort of place at that time. 
Benji B 
So, would you literally just go to the club and then go home and make a tune
straight after? 
Pearson Sound 
Not really. Apart from not really working at night, I think it was more a
gradual thing. After going for the first time, I realized I was missing all
this bass in my tunes, so I’d go and put it in, and then I’d send my tunes to
people and they’d be a bit more popular, and I kind of realized what I was
missing. And then when I started DJing myself and playing on soundsystems,
that’s almost like self-incubation. You can finish a tune that day and play it
that night, and as you play on more and more soundsystems, you realize what
sounds good, which frequencies work, and you can just test stuff out. You can
play a tune and think, “Oh, that wasn’t quite weighty enough,” and add more
bass. Or “That’s a bit overpowering,” so you take some out. DJing almost
becomes like having a massive pair of monitors which you can just use and test
out stuff, and that was definitely the vibe at FWD>> and Redstar. I
played Redstar quite often and I’d always just have a new bunch of tunes and
I’d go and test them out. It was very useful, and I just hope that there are
people who can have similar experiences today, because I feel very fortunate to
be able to have that creative ground to experiment in. 
Benji B 
And as a fan of the music, certainly another environment where’d you go and be
excited to hear new dubs was a club called
DMZ. Do you want to talk
about your experiences there? 
Pearson Sound
Yeah, DMZ was a club night. Well, it’s still going, so DMZ is a club night,
which is often in Brixton, which has changed venues a couple of times. It was
every two months, so a bit more of a special occasion, and it was on a
Saturday night rather than a Thursday, so it was a bit more of a party, more
of a rave. And it was run by the DMZ guys, Mala,
Coki, Loefah, Sergeant Pokes. The whole point of the night
was that they’d headline every night and play for two hours at peak time, and
that was when you’d hear all the new Coki dubs, or all the new Mala dubs, and
everyone would make an effort to come down. People would cancel bookings to
come to DMZ. I remember I got asked to play in whatever city, and I was like, “Oh, I can’t, it’s DMZ.” You’d make excuses – it sounds crazy now that people
would actually do that but people would make the effort. It’s a lot bigger
capacity as well, I don’t know, 600, 700 people, and everyone would be there –
basically everyone from the scene would come down to those nights. So yeah, it
was a bit more of a party. FWD>> was more eyes down, quiet midweek
session, have a few beers, whereas DMZ was until 6 AM, a proper full-on rave.
Benji B 
And some of the original DMZ 12”s are worth a lot of money because
they’re vinyl-only – have you got any of them with you? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, I feel the most appropriate thing to bring to represent DMZ would be a
DMZ record, because although they always invited guests, like, there were
always lots of people on the line-up, it was always about DMZ. The room would
massively fill up when DMZ came on. So I think I’ll play a record by Mala,
who’s definitely a massive influence. He was playing at FWD>> the first
time I went down, playing all his new dubs. I think I’ll play a record called
“Anti War Dub,” which is quite a big tune by Mala and it’s quite hard to get
now on vinyl. It was a vinyl-only release – I bought two. 
(music: Digital Mystikz – “Anti War Dub”) 
Pearson Sound 
I have a particular memory with this record. I think it was DMZ’s third
birthday. They said that every year they’d have a birthday party and every
year they would have a bigger and bashier line-up. And I remember it being a
couple of years since this record had been out, and Digital Mystikz stepped up
and there was this really tangible sense of excitement in the year. For DMZ’s
birthdays, people would travel from America; people would travel from all over
Europe for a club night! You could always buy a T-shirt with the line-up on. People would travel thousands of miles to come to it and all these
international producers, who you’d never met but had talked to on the
internet, would come down and meet up and get talking to each other. Anyway,
DMZ were stepping up, and there was this amazing excitement in the air, and
Mala just put this record on and the place just completely went off. I think
there’s a video on YouTube of it somewhere. It’s one of my favorite memories. I think this tune has a lot to say about the DMZ vibe, it’s called “Anti War Dub” and it’s such a positive, genuine, spiritual message – it’s not just some acapella chucked over the top. It very much sums up their ethos and the way
Mala approaches music. He’s very much about keeping things real, as in a real
physical product, and having a real club night that people come to and joining
people together. And I know that sounds a bit wishy-washy cliché, but with
Mala it’s 100% genuine, and if you ever get the chance to see him DJ, or if
they give a talk or whatever, definitely do it. 
Benji B 
We were lucky enough to have a lecture with Mala a
couple of years back in the Academy which you should definitely check out
online if you haven’t seen it, because he’s definitely a huge influence on
many of us, including yourself, who is now often to be found on the same line-
up as Mala. So, going from the boy, the passionate DMZ fan who’s taking the
night bus to Brixton, and canceling any arrangement in order to be there,
fast-forwarding to being 23 and being billed on the same line-ups – how does that
feel, coming full circle? 
Pearson Sound 
It’s crazy really, because I did my Fabric CD and had a launch party for it, and had him down to play, and that circularity to it is
incredible. I’m always very thankful to him and his approach to music, which
definitely informed mine. 
Benji B 
Another influence that your generation has taken from the DMZ and Mala
approach to music is your commitment to vinyl and cutting dubs and all that. Maybe we should
talk a little bit about that. We heard you play on Sunday night, and clearly
you were playing from Serato, but
as a label, you have a real commitment to putting out records as well. Do you
want to explain that balance? 
Pearson Sound
Yeah, there’s definitely a sort of inner conflict with this. We were talking
about it earlier, the fact that I love vinyl as a format, but then again, not
DJing with it myself has always had me a bit torn. I mean, I run a vinyl-only
club night, even. 
Benji B 
What’s your vinyl-only club night? 
Pearson Sound 
It’s called Acetate – it’s in Leeds currently. I might go somewhere else, it’s just a play area for people with lots of vinyl to bring it down and play it without any technical
problems. Because a lot of the reason a lot of people have stopped using vinyl
is because of clubs not looking after their turntables, leads being dodgy,
needles being rubbish, or pitch controllers being very inaccurate. And it’s a bit of a vicious circle, because if the clubs aren’t looking after their decks,
then no one’s going to want to use them, and if no one’s using them, clubs are
like, “Well, why should we spend £1,000 on a new pair of decks when no one’s
using them?” So I guess it’s a vicious circle, and that’s exactly what’s
happened in the last few years. Basically, no one’s using vinyl in a club
situation now, and there’s only a few clubs where you know everything’s gonna
be cool and you know that they care about their technical set-up. To go
back to Mala again, as a 100%-vinyl DJ, he obviously has a lot of frustrating
experiences where he gets booked and travels thousands of miles, puts on his
first record and just gets a big feedback drone. You know it’s like, if you’re gonna book Mala, at least make sure everything’s tidy! 
I’m a big proponent of vinyl. I love the way it sounds, I love the physicality of it. Serato
and digital DJing is great. With traveling so much, like you sometimes might
play three shows in a row, and not have a chance to go home, and there might
be three completely different gigs. One warming up for a band, then doing a
headline slot, then maybe closing a night, and they’re gonna be three
different sets. I don’t know how they did it back in the day – sorry for
looking at you when I said that [laughs] – but for me now, that’s the format
I play. I’m picky about the stuff I play. If it’s not well enough produced,
I’ll give it a little master at home, change the EQing. A lot of the time
digital formats can be a bit too harsh I find, so when EQing in the club I
like to make sure they’re not ripping people’s ears off. 
But in terms of vinyl, I just love it because when I’m playing vinyl and I’ve got a big crate
of vinyl, it’s not so much about the artists and track name, which is why I
don’t like Serato having this big screen in front of you, desperately trying
to find the tune you’re after – with vinyl, it’s much more visual. A lot of my house records, for example, I have no idea who made them, but I’m like, “Oh, I wanna play the one with the yellow label with the dog on it.” You know exactly what that record is and it’s a lot more instinctive and more fun. So, when I’m playing with Serato, a lot of the time I’ll just switch off the screen of my
laptop, have it completely to one side. I see my laptop as a sort of digital
record box. I see my hard drive as just a massive crate of vinyl. Rather than
having it right in front of my face, the cliché of looking like
I’m checking my emails. 
Benji B 
When you’ve gone to FWD>> in the beginning, or a lot of your early
clubbing experiences, the majority of people would be playing acetates, playing dubs. Was it exciting when you finally got to cut one of your own records? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, well, it was the done thing. CDJs existed back then but no one really
used them. They were very expensive and it was around 2006-2007 that they
really caught on. But yeah, everyone cut dubs pretty much. It was a ritual for nights like
DMZ and FWD>>, you’d cut fresh dubs. I remember once, Mala’s bags got
lost at the airport and he specifically called up the cutting house and got
them to open up on a Saturday and he cut a whole fresh batch of dubs for the
night. It was a ritual, almost, going to the cutting house. I don’t want to
sound like I played 100% vinyl all the time, but I did cut quite a bit, and it
was great because your tunes would get a bit of mastering before they were cut
as well. You know if you play something from CD it hasn’t been through someone
else’s ears, and someone else’s equipment. Whereas if you cut it to dubplate
it’s been through a mastering engineer’s system and they’ve tweaked it a bit, which obviously makes it sound better, and that was the format. It’s a
very nostalgic format. 
I might play something off dubplate because it’s cut in
a different way to vinyl. It’s cut a lot more raw and it’s a lot louder, and
it crackles a lot more. I’m trying to think what I could play. I could play
something new actually. I still cut plates occasionally. I might play a VIP of
a tune I made. The thing about dubplates is that they cost like, well, you can get 10" ones which are a bit cheaper, but 12" ones cost £50, so it’s not cheap, and you’re not gonna cut something that you’ve spent three hours on. So it makes you think about what you’re playing a bit
more, and makes you commit to finishing tunes, and commit to your ideas and
have confidence in your music and other people’s music if you’re spending that
amount of money on it, I think. So, yeah, I’ll play you something. And I’ve got
a couple of dubs so we can have a little show-and-tell because they smell
really nice. So yeah, this is a little VIP I did of a tune of mine called
“Grab Somebody” which I don’t know, I think it’s coming out. 
(music: Ramadanman – “Grab Somebody (VIP)” / applause)
Pearson Sound 
So yeah, if you want a dubplate as well, it’s kind of [knocks dubplate] it’s
made of metal, basically. It’s a kind of metal plate covered with wax. So not
only do they weigh more, they wear out as well, so if you have a dub that
you’ve played 50 times, it will get real crackly and sound a bit weird. But
there’s loads of dubplates from back in the FWD>> and DMZ days that have
never come out, never been released, and sometimes the only copy of the
tune that exists is on one of these. And it’s a very transient medium, so
there are certain tunes that would just be lost forever, which is kind of quite
romantic in a way. Sort of how these very famous original dubstep tunes are
eventually just going to wear away and disappear into thin air. 
Benji B 
So, talking of vinyl, your record label Hessle Audio has a commitment. In fact, sometimes you put out records that are vinyl-only, don’t you? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, not with Hessle, my own productions are vinyl-only. To be honest, it’s due to using very dodgy samples rather than trying to impose stuff on people. In fact, the only vinyl-only releases I’ve done have been ones with incredibly illegal and obvious sampling done on it [laughs]. That’s the reason behind it really, it’s not an elitism thing like, “Oh, I can play that off my laptop
and you can’t.” It’s more, “I don’t really want to get fined by whatever major label.” 
Benji B 
Was the Swamp 81 vinyl-only? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, the release I did on Swamp 81 called “Work Them.” That was vinyl-only, but that
was the choice of the label, that’s the way they run things. I think they’ve
got plans for digital eventually, but I know they have quite an old-school
ethos like that, which I respect and it’s frustrating for some people, but
it’s the label’s choice at the end of the day. If they’re putting out the
music, they can choose how it’s sold and presented, which I think is always
important. If that’s a label’s ethos and the way they want to do things, then
you’ve just got to respect that. I know people who have even bought turntables
just to get a vinyl release, which some might see as a bit excessive in these
economic times. But I think it’s up to the label about how they run things.
With Hessle we always do digital, and it comes out at the same time as the
vinyl. We like to keep it that way because we DJ digitally, so it only seems fair to me that we sell it digitally as well. 
Benji B 
And just while we’re on the subject of “Work Them” on Swamp 81, is it fair to
say that that was the time where things really snowballed for you, in terms of
taking off? It was a very big year for you last year, wasn’t it? 
Pearson Sound
Yeah, 2010 was a bit funny, I wrote loads and loads of music, I had it all
stacked up. I was still finishing uni at the time, so I had quite a lot
of free time to make stuff and ended up writing loads and loads of music. The
way it turned out was that I ended up having a release out every single month,
and I just sort of battened people down until they listened to my stuff. It
was just a bit over the top with release after release. I worked with them,
Swamp 81, and did “Glut,” and a couple of remixes I did definitely helped. And
the fact I worked with them, which was vinyl-only, also helped because it
didn’t become too overplayed and it still stayed a bit fresh I think. I don’t
know, that was my theory on it. Some people think it hasn’t even come out yet
because it’s not on iTunes or whatever, which sort of shows that keeping
things vinyl sometimes avoids oversaturation or being in people’s faces too much. 
Benji B 
A lot of people compared your work then with music from Chicago. Were you
listening to a lot of that sort of music at the time? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, it was kind of impossible not to really, because juke and footwork were so
hyped. London has a habit of picking up on other people’s genres and then
copying them and rinsing them to the ground, unfortunately. I think to a
certain extent that happened with juke. It was kind of a fresh new sound and
everybody got on it, but for me, tracks like “Work Them” and “Glut” were a lot
more influenced by Baltimore. I kind of missed the whole
Diplo thing, because I wasn’t really into that sound
at that time. But the whole Baltimore thing in the UK didn’t seem to take off
as much, but that was way more of an influence on “Work Them” and “Glut,” a
lot more than juke, I thought. It just so happened that the two occurred at
the same time, and so they got compared, and the fact that there were chopped
vocals, but for me, the use of the breaks, the way the rhythms flow, is a lot
more Baltimore club music. 
Benji B 
Can we hear a little bit of “Work Them” just to give people an idea? Because
if you compare it to early tracks that you did like “Blimey,” in the
progression of your sounds, the 808 has become your friend in the last couple
of years, hasn’t it? 
(music: Ramadanman – “Work Them” / applause) 
Pearson Sound 
Sorry, if you find that tune annoying if you’ve heard it too many times, that
vocal gets in your head a bit. 
Benji B 
So, let’s talks about your record label. You mentioned about some of the people
you met in the early days going clubbing, and seeing as you’re only 23 now, that must have been very young. 
Pearson Sound 
Back in the day [laughs]. 
Benji B 
Sort of, back in your day! Ben UFO and Kevin Pangaea, tell us about your
relationship with them. 
Pearson Sound 
Well, basically I went down to FWD>> for the first time on my own, none
of my friends were into this kind of music. FWD>> always opened really
late, because they were always a bit sloppy with opening hours. So we were
waiting outside for about an hour normally before going in. There was this guy
outside and I met him, I think I might have spoken to him on the internet a
couple of times on this website where people who were into dubstep chatted. We
just got talking and it’s just bizarre to think that if the club had opened on
time or I had decided not to go down that night, I wouldn’t know Ben, who also
lived with Kevin Pangaea, and we wouldn’t have started the label, and things
would be really different now. So, it’s very bizarre, I don’t like to think
about it too much, we could get into fate and destiny and all that. 
It’s just very strange that he was the guy I met the first time I went down
and now we’re still really good friends, and we DJ together and run the label
together. 
Benji B 
So presumably, on Hessle number one, you had no idea how to put a record out and you
had to experiment, right? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, I had no idea how to do it. I had help from a couple of friends – this
guy called Whistler who runs an internet radio station, and he started his own label. So, I called him up and asked him how he did it, and he gave me a really
detailed breakdown. Basically the thing he said was that you need
distribution. I didn’t really understand that at first, I was like, “What? You
just press your records and you sell them, don’t you?” And I didn’t realize
how important it was to have someone to get those records to people, because
there’s only so much you can drive around London in a car and sell them to
shops. If you really want your record to be heard by people, it’s got to go
all around the world and all around the country and different shops. So, I wrote this
letter to a distributor, and put in a few CDs with some tunes, and eventually
heard back from her, and had some hour-long heart-to-heart on the phone, found
out how it all worked, and it just started like that. 
It was very much a learning process. Our second release had about five different test presses. It
took like, six months to come out and was full of nightmares, but experiences
like that just help really. Because if everyone did everything for us we
wouldn’t have a clue, and I’m very grateful that we had those painful initial
experiences. And eventually, we signed to a pressing and distribution deal, which is basically you give a distributor music and they arrange all the pressing. You
still do all the artwork, you still have full creative control, but they sort
out the boring stuff – they get the artwork in the right format, and they
arrange delivery, and it makes life a lot easier, and they get better rates
with studios and shops. 
If you can, getting a press and distribution deal is
great. But I think it’s also good to try doing it the DIY way first. I used to
go around Soho in London and go to all the record shops and sell records to
shops myself. I’d even sell records outside DMZ, for £5 a record. I remember
that Benga bought one of my records. He used to sell his CDs and he was
like, “Oh, I used to do that,” and he bought a record off me. I think people
appreciated seeing that, it was like a farmers’ market, you know, meeting the
person that made your potatoes. They’d meet the person that made
their record, and I think people like that in a way. I did that for a bit and
then realized that it’s not really about standing outside a nightclub at five
in the morning trying to sell your record, and half the people lost the
records on the night bus, so it was a bit silly, but it was a good experience. 
Benji B 
So fast-forward to now and you’ve just released a compilation, which in a way
is a summary of everyone who is on the label, it’s called 116 & Rising. 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, it was our first biggest project, because we’ve been running since early 2007, so it’s now been four years and we kind of thought we’d have a crack at
doing something bigger. We haven’t had an artist album and we don’t really
have any plans to, because there were quite a lot of compilations that were
coming out last year by big record labels, sort of more commercial stuff, and
I think our distributor was like, “Look, you guys should try doing that.” They
definitely believe in us, they’ve been very supportive, so they gave us all the
support we needed and told us how to do it, and we assembled all the tunes,
some nice artwork, with some hiccups along the way, and eventually we got it
out which is a product that we’re really happy with. It’s a triple vinyl,
nicely designed, double CD and the whole vibe of it was having everyone who’s ever been released on the label. 
It was a very democratic affair, there was no
preferential treatment for any particular tune. On the vinyl, there are two
tracks on each side, there’s no tune that gets the whole side. It was kind of a thank you to everyone that has released on the label, and sort of
pushing what’s out now. Cosmin TRG was our first release in
2007 and now he’s changed his name slightly and is making very different
music, but it’s still great stuff and we wanted to put it out and just sort of
show what people are up to. We’ve also done a tour to support it, so it gives
you a lot of different opportunities, and obviously having a CD out there
appeals to a lot more people. There’s a lot of people that don’t buy vinyl or
have no interest in vinyl, but as soon as there’s a CD on the shelf, people
buy who go to HMV or just want something to play in their car. You can never
be too complacent with who your music is reaching, because you might assume a
lot of people have heard your music, but there’s a lot of people who never
will have. So, we put in a second CD of a selected back catalog, just to give
people a bigger perspective on what we’ve been doing for the last few years. 
Benji B 
And if there is a camp of Hessle artists, like a Hessle crew, do you want to
list a few of the people who have been released on the label? 
Pearson Sound 
Well, aside from my own stuff and Pangaea’s music, there’s about eight or
nine of us now. We’re all mates. There’s no one on the label that I’ve never
met and there’s no one on the label that I wouldn’t go for a beer with, so
it’s a really nice environment to work in. We’ve got
Untold, we’ve got James Blake, we released one
of his first records. We’ve got
Joe, Elgato, Peverelist, Blawan, I don’t want to miss
anyone out, it’s like naming my children. I think that might be it. So, yeah, there’s a really nice crew of people and everyone gets along, and it’s a really nice thing to have. I don’t think I’d ever want to release
someone’s music if I hadn’t met them or I didn’t get along with them. If I
thought someone was an idiot, I’m not sure I would want to put out their
music, to be honest. 
Benji B 
So going back to release one, what was your manifesto or your ethos when
you got together and decided you wanted to do Hessle? Where did the name
Hessle come from? 
Pearson Sound 
Well, at the time I was in University in Leeds for a few years and Ben and
Kevin were also in Leeds and they lived together. They’d been in Leeds for a
few years and I came up, as a sort of fresh-faced first-year student, and I
kind of wanted to start a label. Those guys were my sort of dubstep
friends and they were into the idea too. So, we thought of a name – we were
getting sent tunes at the time because we were DJing in clubs a bit and we had
a radio show. There was this guy called TRG from Romania, and he sent us a
couple of really amazing tunes, which sounded very different from what was
being made at the time. If you think of what defines dubstep as a genre, a lot
of people would be like, a half-time beat pattern, a kick snare, slightly more
sluggish kind of half-step of rhythm. But the tunes that this Romanian guy
sent us were completely different. They were like, garage-y, shuffle-y – they had
a completely different groove from anything that was being made at the time,
so we thought that was an ideal way to start the label. Initial problems
aside, we got the first record out, and it was really well received, it had
quite a few DJs playing it. I think people found it quite refreshing, in a
way. Yeah, that’s kind of how it started. The name comes from the street that
Ben and Kevin used to live on. We had a big brainstorm trying to think of a
name, and it took ages, we had some rubbish potential ones, and we actually
changed the name at the mastering session for the first release. He was like, “So what shall I write into the groove?” And it was going to be Hessle Avenue
but we changed it to Hessle Audio. It’s funny how these things work out, isn’t
it? So we had the first record out, we waited a few months because of all the
problems with the second one, but we got that out, then it became a bit more
flowing. Then when you get more of a reputation, then you get sent more
interesting music. A lot of the releases we’ve done have been very natural
processes. Someone like Joe, for example, we’ve known him for a while, and he
kept sending us music and we were hanging out with him for ages. It was never
unsolicited, it was never like, “Dear Hessle Audio, please find attached…” We
knew he was working on stuff, and it was very back and forth, and eventually
he sent the right tunes, and we rolled with it. 
Benji B 
116 & Rising is a really good starting point to understand if you want
to get familiar with the music of Hessle. But bearing in mind that you’ve gone
from a first DIY release to now having a well-distributed and beautifully
produced compilation, there’s a couple of people here that might be thinking
of starting a label or who have already started a label. Are there a couple of bits of advice that you could impart? In 2011, what would they be? 
Pearson Sound 
I would have loved someone to do the same for me, but it didn’t happen, so
I’m more than willing to share a couple of things. Firstly, just make sure
that the music you put out is amazing, basically. There are a lot of labels
that release alright tunes and it just doesn’t generate that same
excitement. If you’re consistent with the music you release, if you’re
consistent with it being original, not gimmicky, forward thinking. The way we
see it at Hessle is the kind of stuff you’d be listening to in ten years’
time. If it’s got that longevity, and isn’t something people are going to get
sick of, then it’s something that people are probably going to be interested in. So that’s one thing: Be original. Obviously, name helps. And the way you
present yourself. If you call yourself like, Slime Audio, or something like
Filthy Bangers [laughs] or something like that, your label is going to be
perceived in a very different way than if it’s called Sandwell District, which kind of
reflects the kind of music that’s on it. So that’s maybe something to think
about. I would say, try and keep the boring admin side in check, because we
had it where we didn’t, and four releases in, suddenly you have this backlog
of records. It all catches up with you. So, I would say keep royalties and
mechanical copyrights in good check. Make sure you’re paying everyone, account to your artists, and be open with them. There’s nothing worse than labels that are all shady or you try and ask for royalty statements and they just ignore you. I
think it creates an uneasy atmosphere, because they’re making money
from you so why shouldn’t you get your cut? Be open with your artists and keep
your business end in good order. Also, I don’t really like it when labels
release a massive list of “We’re going to release these 12 releases this
year,” and then you get to the end of the year and they’ve released one, if
not two. I think, and we do it at Hessle, that’s there’s a lot to be said for
keeping your cards close to your chest a bit, don’t get people’s hopes up.
Because there are inevitably delays, especially if you’re doing vinyl. There
are inevitably things that can go wrong. Even in the last couple of weeks, we
had a sort of lacquer for the pressing plant go missing, it ended up in some
depot in Holland, and they couldn’t find it for ages, and that holds up a
release for two weeks. There’s always these problems that happen, so if you
tell people it’s out next week, and it doesn’t come out for two months, people
are like, “Oh great, I don’t really care now.” If you say it’s coming out on a
specific date and it does, I think it creates a better vibe. That’s how we do
things, anyway. 
Benji B 
Thank you very much. So ,we talked technically about the label side of things.
Let’s talk technically about you as a producer for a minute and geek out on some technical things. What did you
start off using and what do you use now to make your music? 
Pearson Sound 
Well, I started off using keyboards and tape recorders, then I started using a
demo version of the software. Then I started using FruityLoops, and to be
honest, my set-up has stayed pretty consistent. I only got monitors in 2008. I was writing stuff on these little computer speakers and a sub, which was fun for a bit. But if I was going to advise you to buy anything, definitely buy monitors, because if you can’t hear accurately what your
stuff is sounding like, then I think you’re kind of shooting yourself in the
foot a bit. I know there’s some massive producers who just use the stuff
they’ve been using for years, but I do think that monitors are very important.
Definitely buy the best you can afford, because you get what you pay for with
monitors, really. I’ve had the same ones for four years and I know them really
well, and I know they tell me the truth about what my music sounds like. So
over the years my set-up has stayed relatively consistent. I’ve bought a few
bits of new hardware and occasionally a better computer. Sometimes it’s fun to
have something to play around with. If you’re always clicking on your mouse,
it can get a bit frustrating, and sometimes to get that new inspiration, you
just need something to play around with, something physical to tweak and make
sounds with. If I’m ever feeling uninspired or like I can’t write any music
today, if you just switch in the synthesizer, press record and jam out for a
bit, you always end up with some interesting noises and you feel like you’ve
done something. My set-up is relatively simple. A track like “Work Them” is
100% digital, there’s nothing outboard in that at all. Whereas a lot of my
other stuff comes from external sources. 
Benji B 
Is that a bedroom-made record? 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, pretty much. 
Benji B 
Your neighbors must love it. 
Pearson Sound 
Well, the great thing about living in Leeds in student housing is that all
your neighbors are students and they don’t really care. I was very fortunate
for a few years to have a space where I could just make as much noise as I
wanted. I think that’s very important as well, because if you can’t hear your
music loud, then you’re missing out on a big aspect of it. So if you’re
fortunate enough not to have neighbors, or have nice neighbors or have a separate studio space, then
that’s very beneficial. 
Benji B 
Tell us briefly about building a track – where does it start for you? I mean,
obviously everyone has their own process, but when you sit down and start from
a blank canvas, how do you start building a tune? 
Pearson Sound 
It very much varies tune to tune. Some tunes you might hear a sample that you
really want to use, and then you start playing with that and putting stuff on
top of it. I’m very rhythm-orientated, so sometimes I might just start a
drum beat and see what happens. Things can go in very interesting ways, like, if
you start with a sample and build around it, sometimes I’ll just end up taking
out that original sample. It can drift very far from what you started with.
Some of the best stuff I’ve made has been happy accidents, in a way, like
deleting something by accident and realizing it sounds better like that, so I know it’s hard to pin it down in a specific formula, or a specific manner of
working, but maybe generally starting with drums and rhythm. Because I find if
a tune doesn’t have that certain groove, or that certain rhythm, then I never really like it that much. 
Benji B 
Can you explain to us why you’ve got so many different names? 
Pearson Sound 
[Laughs] I’m sure a psychologist would have a field day. For stuff like my
Maurice Donovan stuff, I might play one of those tunes in a bit, that’s a
sonic decision, that’s very much a separate project. Whereas I work as
Ramadanman, I work as Pearson Sound, I’ve done a few collaborative projects.
But I think when you were talking about 2010 and I had all these different
releases out, I think part of the reason was that I had a few different names,
so if people bought a Ramadanman record one week, then a Pearson Sound record
the next, there might be a lot of people that might not know that the two
people are the same, and so it can be beneficial in terms of not over-
saturating. Also, with the name Ramadanman, it is something I made up when I
was like 13. It’s a really stupid name. And I’ve been doing stuff as Pearson
Sound since 2008, but it’s only in the past couple of years that I’ve solely
focused on that. I see it as a far more serious name, a bit less gimmicky, and
also I think certain names can get associated with certain sounds and styles
of music. I think you see it happen quite often with producers. People say, “Oh, he’s a drum & bass producer, so I’m not even going to listen to his new
stuff.” So, I think names can often give you a bit more freedom, maybe remove
preconceptions. And I just think it’s quite fun, trying to confuse people and
switch things up. I’d like it to just be judged on the music, basically, and
for people not to worry too much about who made it. 
Benji B 
How do you deal with the Ramadanman imitators and the Pearson Sound imitators, of which there seem to be a few coming up? 
Pearson Sound 
On the way here, I was listening to some of the stuff I’ve been sent recently. It’s quite funny when people send you stuff that is really copying you. [Laughs] I’m not sure what the intention is, maybe they think, “Oh it
sounds like you, maybe you’ll like it.” I mean, I’m not really bothered by it,
because I think I did it first, in a way. But it can be a bit frustrating
sometimes. But as long as I’m happy with being original I don’t really let it
get to me. There’s definitely “imitating” and “being influenced by” and some
of my good music friends who have had big tunes have even said to me, “Oh,
sorry about that Dave, that might have been a bit too close.” And I don’t
really care, it’s not like I’ve never been influenced by anyone, and it’s not
like I can trademark certain sounds. I can’t trademark an 808. I don’t really
think about it too much. If I like a tune, I’ll play it, pretty much. 
Benji B 
Who are your musical contemporaries at the moment? Who are you looking to
that really inspires you? 
Pearson Sound 
It’s a bit tricky really because I find whenever I get asked the inevitable
“Who are your influences?” question, it’s always like, “I never really see it
in that way.” Obviously, I like a lot of artists, and a lot of different
artists, but as much as I like
Madlib, or whatever, I would never really say, “This tune is influenced by
Madlib.” I think it’s a bit more subconscious in a way – you’re influenced by
everything around you, people you hang around with, the lifestyle you lead, so
I find it really hard to pin down. I could list people that I like, but if
you’re talking about musical peers, I definitely think there’s a movement of
people, that we get booked for similar nights or play on similar bills, or
hang out and do radio shows together. That would be people like Ben and Kevin,
anyone from Bok Bok,
Jackmaster, Oneman, to Floating Points to Joy Orbison, James Blake, Mount Kimbie, and all that lot. If
we’re seeing it as musical peers, we’re all similar ages, similar
musical backgrounds, but we’re all off doing different things and we all respect each other’s space, I think. 
Benji B 
It’s interesting that you come from such a dubplate culture of cutting tunes
early, but there seems to be a paranoia amongst the new-school labels about
letting tunes out too early, and them getting ripped from radio shows and put
on YouTube too early. Sometimes, as a radio DJ I get sent a Night Slugs
release the week before it comes out, which is not something I’ve ever been
used to in terms of getting music early. 
Pearson Sound 
It’s almost like anti-promotion in a way. I kind of like it. I think too
often there are tunes that 20 DJs end up having and they just become
overplayed and people become sick of them. By the time they come out,
everyone’s like, “Oh, I’m not even gonna buy this, I’ve been hearing that
vocal for that last six months, I don’t want to hear it.” So, for example,
with something like “Work Them,” we took a decision to hold it back. And I
think it’s about keeping music special as well, because if everyone’s got a
tune, what’s the point? Once it’s out and people can play it themselves, then
I guess it’s fair game. But before release I think it’s important to keep
things special. For my own music, I don’t really send it out that much, I like
to keep it. If people come to see me DJ, they want to hear my new music, and if
I’m the only one that has certain tunes, then that’s cool. That “Grab
Somebody” thing, I think maybe one or two people have it, and that keeps it
special. If you want to come and see me play, you know you’ll hear things that
no one else will have or stuff that I’ve just made, which keeps things fresh. 
Benji B 
Well, there’s loads of tunes of yours that I’d love to play on these
speakers, but I think it’s time to open questions up to the floor before we
play some more music. 
Audience member 
I spend a lot of times in airplanes and airports as well and I was wondering
what your favorite production or editing set-up was in an airport, on an
airplane, when you only have that little table? 
Pearson Sound 
I never make music anywhere other than my studio or my bedroom. I find, apart
from the fact that I DJ on my laptop and I would have to carry two laptops,
I’d probably end up having to do all the work twice. I’d make the tune but then
I’d probably have to re-edit it, re-balance it, change the mixdown. I see
traveling as a very different space mentally from DJing. I think often when
you’re traveling, you’re tired or annoyed or stressed, and I don’t really
find it a very conducive atmosphere to making music, personally. I know a lot of
people love writing stuff on the road, and that’s the only chance they get. But I’d rather keep the two separate and watch some films instead of making music, personally. 
Audience member 
I really wanted to know, what do you call your music? It’s obviously not
dubstep any more, so what do you name it? 
Pearson Sound 
We didn’t get on to talking about dubstep as a name, but for a long time,
people were very interested in the name and people wanted to be associated
with the name. But now it seems the opposite – when dubstep comes to mean
something else, everyone runs away from it. I think part of the music that’s
going on now, part of its success is that it doesn’t have a name. When people
ask me what I DJ, it’s quite a difficult question, without reeling off a list
of different genres. I think it’s a good thing not to have a defined name to a
scene. Because as soon as it gets a name like dubstep, it means something, it means a kick on the first
beat, a snare of this beat, and personally, I’m all for avoiding it. I know
that journalists and shops, especially, love to label something in that way,
but I’d rather just not think about it too much to be honest. But I guess it
just takes elements from a lot of different music and combines them into
something fresh, hopefully. 
Audience member 
My opinion on the music scene happening right now is all about what’s coming
from the US and UK. But to compare those two places, England’s music seems to change all the time, like every
ten years there’s a big movement, or every couple of years music changes. What do you think pushed the music scene to go forward all the time? 
Pearson Sound 
I think the UK has always had this culture of soundsystems, this lineage of
music. Some people subscribe to this theory of the hardcore continuum, where
acid house goes into hardcore which goes into jungle, goes into garage, goes
into dubstep. I think it sort of makes sense, but I think you can’t start
applying new music into that theory. So I think there’s always been this
lineage of new music, and there’s a hunger for it. Partly because the club
scene is so strong, there’s a lot of clubs, and very underground music is
still popular. You can have a very underground artist playing to 1,000 people
in the UK quite easily. You have clubs like Fabric playing really underground
music to 3,000 people every weekend, so it’s definitely more in the culture. There’s a bigger audience for it. But to answer the question of
why it’s always moving forward, I think it could be to do with the
soundsystems. Often, the soundsystems in the UK are to a good standard, and I
think having a soundsystem that accurately represents frequencies and has all
the bass is important. I think if I played the tune I just played on tiny
little speakers, it would lose a lot of its impact. So, having spaces where
people can hear music how it’s meant to be heard are very important. Without
wanting to generalize, in America, that isn’t quite the case. A lot of people
are frustrated there because they know how good we have it in UK and Europe.
But I think that’s also part of the reason why music develops in different
ways, like for example the really noisy dubstep, it sounds quite good on
phones or really small speakers. It’s not as essential to have the full
frequency range. So yeah, to summarize, I think it’s to do with better
soundsystems. But I’m not too sure really, it’s hard to say. 
Audience member 
You’re obviously in a really privileged place where you can go over a lot of
styles now, and you’re not held to the dubstep scene, but your new stuff is
doing this very purist house thing. Do you ever feel like there’s a duty or a
danger of diluting something that came from a small purist underground scene
when you’re constantly going between things? 
Pearson Sound 
I think the whole house thing is very interesting because right now we’re in
a time where, especially for my peers and this movement, it would be much
easier if it had a name, wouldn’t it? But yes, this current musical
climate is a lot more house-based than normal, and I think it’s a bit
dangerous in a way. There’s a lot of stuff about at the moment – is it just
re-hashed house from the ’90s with a slightly more modern touch? There’s a bit
of emperor’s new clothes syndrome, which I sort of agree with, and when I DJ
I’m very conscious of it. I love house music, I’ve been DJing it for years,
when I was a teenager, but I don’t really feel like that’s what I’m here to
do, I’m not here just to play a house set in a club. So, I think there’s
definitely a danger of becoming a bit too formulaic in that kind of way. And
you said earlier about being in a more privileged position where you can play
a lot of genres and I think a couple of years ago, people who would come to
see me play would be expecting a certain sound, and at that time things were
already moving. If I played newer stuff or the housier stuff, people would get angry, and it
still happens recently even, sometimes in America or even in Australia,
someone told me to: “Play some dubstep, you...” Insert expletive here.
So, you do get it, but now I do feel very fortunate to be able to
play a two-hour set and be able to start at house music and end at dubstep and
play all sorts in between. I think that’s what I’d really like to
do, just keep the variety, because I’m not sure I could ever just play an hour
of the same kind of music any more. 
Audience member 
I’m curious, when you make music, do you always make music to be heard in the
club, or do you want people to listen to the same music at home?
Pearson Sound
My primary thought when making tunes is definitely how it’s going to sound on
a soundsystem. I think that’s just the mind I’ve always been in. Going to FWD>>
it’s all about the club. I mean, obviously stuff like the ambient thing or
music that I make for different intentions, then it becomes different. But the
club and the dancefloor stuff I play is always designed for how it will sound
on a soundsystem, and that’s definitely the optimum environment for it to be
heard, or at least on a very good hi-fi with lots of bass. So I always have that in mind. 
Audience member 
Do you see yourself in the future doing the club stuff, or do you see yourself
produce more like the ambient stuff? 
Pearson Sound 
I just like to keep doing everything really, I enjoy being able to make big
club records, but then I like doing something really introspective, like a
three-minute drone piece or whatever. I like being able to do that. I think
the danger is when you start thinking, “Oh, will this sound good on a mobile
phone?” or “Will this sound good on speakers with no bass?,” that’s maybe when
you start to compromise how you make music. You shouldn’t be compromising
music for the format it’s played on, you should be catering for you, I think.
Obviously, that’s an ideal world, but I think that’s what you’ve got to aim
for. 
Audience member 
You were speaking earlier about when you gave your physics teacher your CD or
whatever it was with your music on it, and you said you had an explanation of
what you were feeling when you created it, or…? 
Pearson Sound 
It was less feeling, it was just jumbled thoughts of a 15-, 16-year-old, you
know? For the drum & bass tune, I was like, “This is a really rave drum &
bass tune, the vocal is a bit stupid, but it’s wicked.” [Laughter] I’ve got
it here, but I’m not going to read anything out, it’s probably far
too cringe.
Benji B
You shouldn’t have said that.
Audience member
Why do you think you felt you had to do that? 
Pearson Sound 
I don’t know really. I think I gave CDs like that to a couple of other
people, and I don’t know what to say about how to explain myself… I don’t
know. 
Audience member
It’s just interesting, because then you said you did radio, so I’m pretty sure
you were doing that on the radio, too, explaining songs while you were playing
them. 
Pearson Sound 
I did two different kinds – I did fake radio shows when I was about 10, just
pretending to be the interviewer and the interviewee, and all sorts of stuff.
I don’t have those with me, thankfully. But then I used to also do Rinse FM and other stations, but I’ve never really introduced tunes there before I played them. Say, if before I played an ambient tune, I was like, “This is a really sad piece of music, you should feel sad,” I think
that’s almost pre-determining how people should react to a piece of music, whereas a lot of my favorite stuff is very ambiguous or even ambivalent. Some
tunes that people find deeply sad, I find incredibly euphoric, and I think the
way music is interpreted should never be dictated. I think a lot of music
nowadays can almost be telling people how they should react to it, when I find
some of the best music has been people that have very personal
interpretations. 
Audience member 
Was grime important in the development of your sound? 
Pearson Sound 
I was into grime before I was into dubstep, in fact. People like Dizzee Rascal, Wiley, they were very present living in the UK, they were in the charts, they were on Top Of The Pops, they
were on television, they were on the radio, so it was kind of impossible to
ignore. And I think being a sort of, middle-class kid from north London,
you’re always seeking cool edgy stuff. So, I checked out grime, and kids in my
school were always swapping CDs and stuff like that, I was definitely into
grime. I made a few grime instrumentals, and the way I heard about dubstep was
that I was posting some of these grime instrumentals on the internet, and
someone was like, “Nah, mate, this isn’t grime, this is dubstep.” And I was
like, “What’s dubstep?” And I did a quick Google, and that’s how I got into
dubstep, basically, because someone said my tune sounded like dubstep before
l’d ever even heard of the thing. I still love grime, I’m more into the grime
instrumental stuff. I find some of them just incredibly forward-thinking and
completely out-there. 
Audience member
I got to work with Danny Weed a couple of years ago, and I feel like he’s really overlooked in the UK – he’s like the Dr Dre of the UK and no one really knows about it. 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, there’s loads of grime producers that have maybe made one or two
records who then disappeared off the face of the earth, or gave up on music,
who made some incredible stuff. People like Musical Mob or Agent X, or even Dizzee
Rascal’s early beats are completely bonkers, basically, and there’s not enough
recognition. I think maybe there should be a comprehensive sort of...
Audience member 
Hessle.
Pearson Sound 
A Hessle grime tape. Actually, there’s a site called Grime Tapes, which has collated loads of important pirate radio
recordings, because a lot of these instrumentals were never released. They
only exist as a two-minute freestyle on some pirate station, and were lucky enough
to be recorded maybe. So, if you’re interested in that, have a look at Grime
Tapes, they’ve got some really interesting stuff. 
Audience member 
[Inaudible]
Pearson Sound 
That too. I think a lot of that stuff, the producers didn’t so much care about putting it out. Unfortunately, sometimes in that scene, it can be too much about the money. Somebody writes a sick beat and they’re like, “You can have it, yeah, but you’ve got to pay me like £4,000.” Obviously, that’s a ridiculous amount of money, so it often got to a loggerhead by the artist being too demanding and not really caring whether it came out and just doing it for the money in a way. 
Audience member 
We were talking about music cycles and the UK music scene. Do you think that in a couple of years people will ask you to play bass music? 
Pearson Sound 
I think genre names have always been a bit stupid. Like, drum & bass is funny
because so much other music has drums and bass. I mean, even dubstep’s a
stupid name because it doesn’t have anything to do with dub, as in dub reggae,
it’s dub as in instrumental. So, even a name like that is really misunderstood.
I quite like the name brostep, I think that’s quite good. But in terms of
genre names, I don’t really know. Stuff like bass music, UK bass, future
bass, have stuck more than other genre terms, and I don’t mind them so much
because they’re quite ambiguous, and they emphasize the whole bass aspect,
which is cool. So yeah, if something like that came on the label, I wouldn’t
mind too much, really. 
Audience member 
What do you think is going to happen? Do you think that it will be the same
cycle, like the music gets noisier, or more intelligent things will come from
it? 
Pearson Sound 
I think you can see it in a different way; like with this 808 stuff, there’s
a lot of really boring 808, or even when the 2-step stuff got popular and
people started putting chopped up vocals and nice pads over things, that became
rinsed and rinsed and it got to a stage where it got really boring. So, maybe
there won’t be loads of wobbles over it, but it will just get to a really boring stage. I don’t really know to be honest. I think there will always be people doing really interesting stuff. People like Richard Russell, who runs XL Recordings, he said recently on Twitter something like, people are always hungry for new music. People might always assume that the mainstream content is lowest-common-denominator kind of stuff, but I think innately, people have a hunger for new
stuff and progression. I don’t think it’s anything to worry about, particularly. 
Benji B 
Any more questions? 
Audience member 
I would just like to elaborate on the question of genres, because it’s
interesting to me, who has never lived in the UK or the US. But when I look at
the UK, it’s interesting because it has so many sub-genres, and when I look at
a place like LA, for example, which is pretty much the LA beat scene, there’s
not really much else in terms of labeling. I know you have a problem with
certain names like dubstep or future bass and so on, but I was wondering if
you have a problem with names, or with the labeling process itself – do you
think it should be more condensed? 
Pearson Sound 
I don’t really have a problem with any of the genre names. They might be stupid, but to a certain extent you need it. If you walk in to a record shop, and there were no dividers in the records, and it was all “Music,” like when record
shops have sections called “Electronic Music,” that’s just not helping anyone.
So you do need these labels, but unfortunately, they have a side effect often
of defining a genre, or coming to represent something which is not necessarily
the music. So, in that sense, I have a problem with the labeling process, but
I also accept that it’s necessary in order to just make life a bit easier, I
think. Everything’s all house anyway, basically [laughs]. 
Audience member 
Just because we’re on this theme of progression of cycles or whatever, I’ve
been thinking about this a lot. Last week Francisco Lopez was talking about how a lot of his records kind of sound the same,
in a sense, and there’s no aesthetic progression sometimes. What he was saying
is that you wouldn’t expect other art forms to progress at all from one year to
the next… 
Pearson Sound 
What you mean, like a Picasso painting always looks like a Picasso painting? 
Audience member 
Or that a painter would have periods, which may take them like, 20 paintings
that are all of a piece, whereas with music it’s sort of assumed that people
want to progress and hear new things. So, the question is, do you think that there can be
something almost harmful in that, in the quest for novelty? Because the idea
that a nice chopped vocal on a pad, it does get rinsed, you’re right, but maybe
musically, the great song hasn’t happened yet. 
Pearson Sound 
I tell you what, I’ll play you a quick clip of a tune that came out on my
label, which is kind of a period of time when I was talking about
experimentalism in places like FWD>> and places like that. There’s this
guy called Untold who we released, and he released an EP called It’s Gonna Work Out Fine, which was this six-track EP of incredibly out-there
ideas. This is a tune called “Anaconda” which you would drop in a club, and
people would sort of laugh. There can be a danger with trying to make
something so new and out-there that it just becomes really unlistenable and
very self-indulgent and a bit arsey. But if it’s done correctly, I think you
can get stuff like this. This is a tune called “Anaconda” which came out on
Hessle, and I remember playing this in clubs, and people would just crack up and look really confused, which was quite funny. 
(music: Untold – “Anaconda”) 
Pearson Sound 
As long as it doesn’t disappear so far into its own backside, I think it’s okay,
you know, as long as it retains that sense. People will still dance to that,
it might take people a little while to pick it up. But I do see what you’re
saying, if people are always feeling like they have to progress, it doesn’t
become club music any more, it becomes installation music, or whatever. 
Audience member 
I think if someone wants to do something that different, that’s got to be a
good thing. I think it’s less about the positive side of it and more about the
negative side, which is if somebody makes a good tune, but nobody wants
to hear it. It’s not that I think progression is bad, it’s the mindset of the
listener. 
Pearson Sound 
You mean if someone made a massive record, but it came out a year later than
a record that kind of did the same thing, does that mean that record is no
longer a massive record? 
Audience member 
Yeah, or someone does something, and it’s like, “Oh, that would have been an
amazing tune if it had come out a year ago.” And you’re thinking, “Well, it is
or it isn’t.” There’s definitely something about the mindset of progression,
and in other genres you don’t get that. Like, how many people who were into
funk, who made an amazing funk tune, would go, “Well, it would be good if it
came out in the ’70s”? 
Pearson Sound 
That’s a really good point, actually, I’ve never really heard anyone think
about it like that. The way I see my own music, is a tune like “Work Them,”
for example, I could try and make it again, or use similar drum sounds, and
you were talking about painters having periods, and I work in that way. You
know, I write a block of tunes in a similar style before progressing and doing
something different. I’m a believer that there’s no point trying to make a
tune you’ve already made – the one that came first is generally the best one,
and you’d end up just wasting your time to try and clone something. The way I
see it is that you spend ages working on a style, and then you release a tune
that sort of encompasses all of that, and everything you wanted to do. That’s
a really interesting point actually… I think a lot of it, is what came first.
Why would someone give this record the time of day, when someone has done it a
lot better a year ago? It’s just people’s mindset I think. It’s just about who came first, or who did it first. 
Audience member 
I’m from the south-east US, that’s where I grew up, and we’re not really
known for our club scene… 
Pearson Sound 
Whereabouts in the US? 
Audience member 
North Carolina, and I went to school in Tennessee. We’re not really known for
our club scene – we have guys with big beards playing instruments instead. Flannel. Lots of flannel. You’re from London, you grew up with that. I only started listening to proper
dance music or club music in the last couple of years, really, and I just
wanted to go back to that question of genres and progression. 
Pearson Sound 
Are you thinking that by the time it gets over to the south-east of America
that it’s already changed? 
Audience member 
No, actually I was wondering more about the creative angle. Do you know
anyone that makes music to be played in a club who doesn’t listen to club
music, if that makes sense? You know, who doesn’t follow the constant stream
of that? 
Pearson Sound 
I think there are a few people who inadvertently make club bangers, without realizing it until it gets picked up and gets recontextualized. A
club track will get picked up, and ends up really being big. I can’t think of
any examples off the top of my head, but there have certainly been tracks in
the last couple of years that have been picked up by a certain scene, when
they were made. I played this African house record the other day and I started
playing it, and it’s a South African house record and I doubt that it would
have ever been thought that a London future bass/dubsteppy DJ is gonna
be playing that. I definitely find it interesting when music is designed for
one thing, or one environment, and then it ends up being completely
recontextualized, either by the way it’s mixed or the environment it’s played in. I find that very interesting. 
Audience member 
Yeah, because for me, like when I heard something like James Blake, I thought
that was pretty different. But I guess he’s still following those trends in
club music and stuff. 
Pearson Sound
Well, for James Blake, I mean, I don’t want to speak for him, but I know he
had a bit of an epiphany in a similar way to me and lots of people at DMZ.
When he would come to DMZ back in 2009 to hand out a few CDs – I’ve still got
it somewhere. He had this epiphany with electronic music. I mean, he was into
it before, but this was when it really started informing what he was making. I
think that once you get into that world, you’re always going to start
listening to it. I can’t really think of any example of people who has absolutely no
interest in club music, but somehow their records get picked up by DJs. I
can’t really think of any. 
Pearson Sound
[Inaudible question] 
Pearson Sound 
I think that there are definitely outsiders, which is a very interesting area
that could be looked at. Someone like Burial who’s written some of the most
amazing music, but he’s completely outside of the scene. It’s the same
with a lot of juke music, which is less about the music and more about the
dancing. But the way it’s taken in London is that no one cares about the kids
dancing, they care about the music, and it’s completely flipped on its head in
a way, and been recontextualized. I don’t know if it’s a negative thing,
probably. 
Audience member 
I think in a way that club music has been very professionalized and the whole
process is very rigid, like all the things that you need to make it, and get
your music out there, and getting into charts, and getting on labels. I mean,
there are so many forums for reaching out that I think with this progression
thing it might be about that mystical thing of that creator, who innovates and is this kind of genius and not so much about just listening to music and hanging out with
friends. 
Pearson Sound 
I think definitely in the last few years, it’s become a lot more formalized. As in, you have a big record, you have a strategy, you have a promotion
strategy, like, “Oh, shall we go with the ‘Pretend he was found on MySpace
thing’ and market it like that?” Or there’s going right in with the,
“Oh, he’s a really good looking singer, let’s push that” angle. I think it’s
definitely become a lot more formalized and streamlined in that way, like, “On
the week of release, let’s do this podcast,” or, “The week of release, let’s
give away this MP3 on this site.” And it can be very calculated in that
respect, but it can be really refreshing. I’ve got Levon Vincent on my mind
because his latest record just came out, and the way he operates is that he’ll make music and just say to his distributor, “Look, I’ve got a new
record.” And when it comes out, there’s no press, there’s no promotion,
there’s no hype, it just comes out and people would judge it on its music.
That’s what happened with DMZ. DMZ would never announce their releases, you’d
only find it out like, the week before it came out – it would be in your shops
and it would be a complete surprise. I definitely think that’s missing in a
lot of today’s music, unfortunately. This element of surprise. Without judging
other producers, sometimes there’s a lot of producers who sort of maybe give too much
information. They have ten different press shots from every angle, that cover
every single pore of their face, and cover every minute detail in an interview
about the street which they grew up in. I think sometimes it’s nice to just
hold back a bit and not have that inform people’s opinion of you or your
music. 
Audience member 
I was more speaking about the interest in the thing of like, having a tune that sounds a lot
like one that came out the year before, in that it might be equally good but
you won’t be getting media attention for that because someone else did it.
Because the media wants the artists to be these superhuman creators, and the
scene is being watched by media in a way that was not what it was maybe like
back in the days of FWD>> I kind of feel like that sometimes. 
Pearson Sound
Going back to Mala, who I seem to be constantly referencing, he had this tune
for about a year. He had this tune on dubplate, and there was no label on the
dubplate and he’d play at every gig, and it was a complete mystery, no one
knew who made it, and people were just going completely crazy trying to find
out who made it. There were so many rumors of who it could be, and he held it
down and didn’t tell anyone who it was. But it was actually these guys from
New Zealand called Truth, and
he played this record at the end of every set, and it would completely destroy
it. I’m not sure if I’m misunderstanding your point, but are you sort of
saying that it’s not so much about who made it, but judging the music for
itself? Yeah, I guess that kind of works. 
Benji B 
Any more questions? Maybe you could line up a tune to send us to lunch with. Something to finish on. 
Pearson Sound 
Any requests? I don’t know. 
Benji B 
You can play anything. Play something hype. 
Pearson Sound 
Yeah, I don’t know, one sec, just give me a moment. But thank you very much
for the discussion, that was a very interesting debate. I know, I’m going to
play a tune by a guy called Toasty,
who is one of the unsung heroes of dubstep, who made some of the most amazing
tunes and then disappeared and no one ever heard from him again. I think some
people might be in touch with him, but he made some of my favorite tunes.
This tune is called “Like Sun”
and it was released on Hotflush. 
Benji B 
David Kennedy, Pearson Sound, thanks a lot for your time. 
Pearson Sound 
Thanks. 
[applause]
