Around Berlin, Rashad Becker’s name is synonymous with sonic brilliance — a mastering engineer at Basic Channel’s Dubplates & Mastering studio, he put the finishing touches on over 1,200 of your favorite techno, dub, and house records. Following Basic Channel, Becker set up his own Clunk studio in Kreuzberg, where he created his compelling debut for the PAN label, 2013’s Traditional Music of Notional Species Vol. 1. The record is a disorienting three-dimensional thrill ride inside Becker’s mind, full of overlapping layers, links, and elastic audibles. 
In his 2014 Red Bull Music Academy, Becker explained how (and why) he creates music this chewy and complex, and how you can mix, master, and manipulate your sounds to do the same.
TODD L. BURNS 
Thank you for coming. I assume you were all in the bedroom studios quite late
last night finishing up things. And I think finishing up things is actually a
great way to introduce our lecturer today. Rashad Becker is a mastering
engineer and he also makes music, but will be primarily talking about the
mastering process and recording process as well. I guess the best way and the
simplest way to begin is to ask the immortal question, “What is mastering?”
Rashad Becker 
Right. Basically, the term is, of course, derived from the process of
producing a master, which is the input to mass production. So whatever medium
is going to be the final product, it needs to be something that production can
be copying into many copies. Yeah. For that, you need a master and producing
that master is mastering. The other thing is basically the equivalent to post-production in movies, that is like retouching the sound in the final stage.
That can be basically just compiling the pieces ‘top and tail’ editing,
adjusting the playback volume over the length of an album and it can be quite
invasive. There’s quite a range of what actually can or needs to be done. It
depends on the wishes of the artist, the context of the release, the technical
necessities that a medium might impose that applies mainly to vinyl because
digital media is not so delicate, and it can have purely artistic purpose. If
things that have not been achieved in the mixing or recording stage need to be
addressed before mass production starts.
TODD L. BURNS 
You said there can be quite an artistic sense that a master can bring to
something. Can you talk a little bit about what that entails? I think a lot of
people think that it’s just retouching and tiny things, but it can often
completely transform a track in a way.
Rashad Becker 
Potentially. There’s still a surprisingly lot of things that you can do to a
stereo sound. Mastering has this stigma to it. I don’t know if it’s a stigma,
it’s actually quite a natural perspective, but it should be like a real
engineer’s kind of process. While in production, mixing and recording,
everything is allowed, obviously, and people do hilarious things to sound. In
mastering, you should always be very technical. That makes sense, of course,
but as the music culture changes, though, I think actually there has always
been situations where things go into mass production that have not ever seen a
real studio. The only stage where anyone else gives input to the sonic image
of the music is in the mastering stage. Personally, I don’t see any reason why
mastering should not be very invasive. If the music benefits and, of course,
if the artist asks for it.
TODD L. BURNS 
What do artists ask for when they come to you usually? Is there questions that
you constantly are answering of them?
Rashad Becker 
It depends on what field the music is situated in.
TODD L. BURNS 
Let’s say for a club, specifically, for instance.
Rashad Becker 
Well, any kind of functional music, dance music, brings a different attitude
and different expectance. It carries that along. There’s a more predefined,
maybe, idea of what achievement in sound and achievement in a mix, and then
finally, an achievement in a record or a CD is, than in non-functional music.
That is something that over the years can get a bit frustrating, that idea of
a professional sound that people ask for, because personally, I do not think
that’s really called for in music culture.
TODD L. BURNS 
Sorry. How has it changed exactly over the years that you’ve seen? You’re
saying it’s getting progressively…
Rashad Becker 
I think that’s just inherent in dance music and other forms of functional
music. There’s more people having access to means of production, not
necessarily having more access to education and dealing with means of
production, so people copy idioms and ideas of what is an achievement in sound
is off each other.
TODD L. BURNS 
So I hear a bass on a track, I want my bass to be that loud or louder is an
example of that?
Rashad Becker 
That would be an example, yeah. Yeah, sure. There’s a few paradigms and a few
leading characters that stand for achievement. Not necessarily if you’re
inspired as a musician, not necessarily that you are also competent to judge
what’s going to work just sonically speaking, not musically speaking, on a
club PA, so that would be, of course, a demand. “Please make it work on a club
PA.” Yeah. It’s also not always beneficial to the diversity of music culture.
TODD L. BURNS 
How did you get into mastering in the first place?
Rashad Becker 
More or less on a social path, I guess, because of just my involvement in
Berlin and then the proximity from the things that we did to that whole social
field that incorporates Hard Wax and Dubplates &
Mastering and Basic Channel.
TODD L. BURNS 
So you got involved in working there? How did that happen? Did you apply for a
job or you were just friends with them?
Rashad Becker 
I was basically just friends and they asked me. The first time they asked me,
I said no because at that time I was working in movies and I was quite
intrigued and I liked the idea that work just stops. Before that, I worked in
the theater and in both realms you sink into a project and everything else
disappears. It’s quite close to a feeling [of being] happy because it’s just
complete. Then, after six weeks or something, it just stops and then you do
nothing and then something else pops up. With the mastering, I could see that
that would not be the case, so I didn’t want to do it in the first place. But
then a year later, I had no job, so I started doing it. I thought I was going
to do it for a year and now I’m doing it since 17 years.
TODD L. BURNS 
How did you gain knowledge as you were going along? You were just watching the
people that were already mastering at the company?
Rashad Becker 
Not so much actually, only in terms of the actual vinyl. We do mainly vinyl
mastering at our studio and so I got an introduction to handling the equipment
and then I think I cut my first master after a month or two, pretty right
away.
TODD L. BURNS 
How has it changed over the years? Has it been basically in the same building,
same place, or has it grown Dubplates & Mastering?
Rashad Becker 
It has moved once, but since I am there, we are in the same building. Yeah. It
did grow a little bit. It doubled its capacity from one studio to two.
TODD L. BURNS 
It seems like a rarity in the music business these days, Dubplates &
Mastering is a place that’s growing a little bit and seems to be doing quite
well in terms of its business.
Rashad Becker 
Actually, I don’t think it’s a rarity, specifically in the vinyl field. Right
now, vinyl is heavily growing. That’s a funny perspective. Last year in the
UK, I read on the BBC World News that in the UK, the share of vinyl sales in
the music market has increased by 48%, which in total numbers means that it
has increased from 0.1 to 1.5%. But nevertheless, I can speak for only the
things, like the pressing plants that we work together, they are totally
running on highest capacity. Within the last maybe year, a lot of the major
labels got back into releasing stuff on vinyl because I think probably they
realized it has pretty good copy protection. I shouldn’t name names, but some
majors tried to book some pressing plants for two years exclusively, for
example, and they’re all pretty much at the highest margin of what they can
produce over time, so vinyl is definitely growing. For us, I think it’s been
quite stable since I know it because we are in a bit of a specialist market, I
guess. We don’t deal so much with major labels, only very, very occasionally.
It has been quite steady from my perspective over the last 15 years.
TODD L. BURNS 
With Dubplates & Mastering, can you talk about if you were to walk in the
door what you would see? What are the elements of a mastering studio or that
mastering studio or your mastering studio, which I guess is in a different
place, correct? You own another place to work.
Rashad Becker 
I have my own, yes, but that’s not in the first place a mastering studio. I do
a little bit of mastering there, but it’s more aimed towards recording and
mixing. Well, there is this ’70s machinery that’s proper industrial machinery
that is the actual cutting and I’m never quite sure how to pronounce that
word, I think it’s lathe.
TODD L. BURNS 
Lathe, I think.
Rashad Becker 
That has a strong ’70s feel to it and looks quite industrial. There’s an
acoustical setup in the room that is in our studio, borderline good looking,
and there’s two pairs of speakers and a little kind of cockpit setup of
processors. Not too many, not excessive, quite decisively selected tools.
TODD L. BURNS 
I asked you earlier what questions artists are asking you on a regular basis.
What do you ask artists when you get a piece of music in?
Rashad Becker 
Well, if the artists are there, a reasonable question, of course, is when we
listen to the stuff together if it deviates strongly from what they know it,
like when they listened to it at their own place. Just that I know how much of
what I hear is a representation of what they were hearing when they were
mixing it. If they come in and they are shocked, “Where’s the bass?” or “What
is all that bass?,” then I need to know that. Then, if it’s not speaking for
itself, like most of the time actually, I guess it is, if it’s not speaking
for itself, a question would be how content or satisfied they are with what
they could achieve within the recording or mixing process. Just to evaluate
how much help it needs. Most of the time, I do think that the music speaks for
itself. If you have quite an excessive high midrange, it could be because the
music is angry or the producer was angry, or it could be because of a bad
listening environment, or it could be because he was completely coked out when
he made the final mix.
[laughter]
So I need to know that. If it’s not self-revealing, I would never ask them if
they were coked out.
[laughter]
TODD L. BURNS 
So you’re asking a lot of questions, in a way, when you get something and
tweak it.
Rashad Becker 
Not really, no.
TODD L. BURNS 
No?
Rashad Becker 
No. The most important thing is for me to evaluate how much of what I hear is
something that someone wanted me to hear. Normally, there’s not a need for
many questions to find out about that. Basically, most of the time, I think
the only question is actually, “Are you surprised of what it sounds like
here?” When they say, “Yeah,” then there’s followup questions, of course, but
if they say, “No,” then I listen to it and I start making suggestions, either
verbally or just practically, which I actually prefer.
TODD L. BURNS 
Why do you prefer practically?
Rashad Becker 
Because of the semantics around sound and I’ve found my own system to speak
about things over the years, which is not always compatible, of course, with
the artists’ terminology. Then, people also tend to juggle the same idioms
that I do not always really comprehend. For example, for me, it’s a bit of a
mystery what “warm” actually implies.
TODD L. BURNS 
How do you speak about music? What are the words that you keep coming back to?
What are the idioms, your idioms?
Rashad Becker 
It really depends. I think it’s always very personalized because people have
different methods of scrutiny and different associations, like some people
have color associations. Others apparently have temperature associations that
I don’t. I have mainly haptical and textural [associations]. To me sometimes,
things sound a bit porose. Then, if I say that to an artist, they are… [looks unsure] So it’s difficult to speak. Of course, you have a technical
terminology, but that also doesn’t always inform the artist, but that is how I
would address issues and say, “This seems to be a bit overwhelming in the
fundamental range. It covers up early harmonics. It covers up late harmonics.
I’d like to clear it a bit in the fundamental range.” Then, the artist might
go, “I was thinking the same thing,” or they might be like, “Mmmmm.”
[negative]
TODD L. BURNS 
You brought some examples of things that you wanted to go through. Could you
maybe set up what you wanted to play and why?
Rashad Becker 
Yeah. That’s quite specific because of the mystery surrounding vinyl
distortion. The hopes that people have attached to it and the trouble that is
derived from it. There was the initial idea that you had to compare digital
files with vinyl versions, which is a very difficult endeavor in a scenario
like this. Let me go back one step back to mastering in one regard. I think
what qualifies you as a mastering engineer, apart from making a judgment call
on how much of what you hear is actually desired to sound that way, how much
of it is achieved in terms of artistical expression or the specific usage of
the music. Yeah. That is one realm of qualification. The other is to have a
real method of comparing sound and that is something that is basically crucial
in all steps of production, of course. And I think that is something where a
lot of mistakes in the mixing stage are made because people do not have a
developed method of comparing sonic processes, comparing sound, post- and pre-
sonic processes, specifically when it comes to compression, but also when it
comes to equalization. Let me go back once more. Comparing sound, to me,
there’s three valid ways of comparing sound pre- and post-sonic processes. One
would be to compare at a similar loudness level, RMS level. I don’t know how
technical all the RBMA got, but RMS level is the loudness level. It’s not
necessarily the same as peak level. It’s actually not just necessarily, it’s
not the same as peak level. One very crucial way to compare sound pre- and
post-compression would be at the same RMS level because otherwise, you will
very probably make a misjudgment. If you compress something level at same peak
level, go back and forth, the loudest signal is always going to win. That
starts at 0.1 or 0.2 dB more, it already sounds better. That is one step.
Another one is compare at same peak level to see how much the compression
actually changes the musical narrative. Also, to see how much you have
achieved in terms of loudness by compression. The third and most valid way, I
reckon, is to single out one element which could be the most annoying element
in the mix or the most precious one and level it just by ears, don’t look at
any meter. Level it so that it speaks to you with the same delicacy or the
same intrusion, that it approaches you in the same way in both conditions, pre
and post-process, and then see how the music wraps around that element to make
a judgment on what you have achieved with that process.
TODD L. BURNS 
What you just mentioned, I think, is something I’ve read and you’ve talked
about and I find it quite interesting is not looking at the lights or dials or
anything while you’re A/B-ing things. You’ve said in the past that you don’t
like to look at anything that’s moving because it may give you a false
impression of actually what’s going on.
Rashad Becker 
Yes. Basically, I really don’t like to look at anything while listening. I
don’t like to look at the computer because you start anticipating the
development of the narrative. If you see a big peak coming up, you’re going to
be like, “Oh, oh,” and it’s going to change your judgment on how that peak
actually sits. If you start looking at values, me personally, I get really
anal about them, when I see like it’s all 0.5 or 0.7, so I want to ignore
that. I do feel informed by blinking lights. They do something to me. They do
something for me maybe even. I don’t want them to influence the way I hear the
music. I think the biggest issue is actually nowadays everyone dealing with
graphical representations of the musical narrative. I think that changes a lot
of music culture in comparison to when it was just something that came out of
a box or you just saw a tape spinning and then you could maybe see how it’s
going to be over soon, but you couldn’t anticipate anything of where the music
is going to go from looking at something. People still do work with HD
recorders and some standalone devices that do not give them a timeline
representation of the sound, and I’ve seen people getting really nervous about
their own compositions. Once they did have the opportunity to look at the
timeline and suddenly they were like, “Is this going on for too long?” It
really changes your perspective, I guess.
TODD L. BURNS 
Yeah, I think even someone who doesn’t make music, as a listener, watching
things on SoundCloud, you’re exactly right, that you are, “Oh, I’ll skip to
the bit, yeah, OK, I’ll hear the drop and whatever.” It’s
completely transformed the listening experience even from that side. Back to
the comparison, I think one of the things we wanted to do was create a
situation in this room where we could compare some things properly and easily.
Rashad Becker 
Exactly. Yeah. I thought, “It can’t be on two different media because we can’t
provide the environment for that here,” because you have to be really precise
about the levels. If I play you twice the exact same signal and one is half a
dB louder, you’re going to opt for the louder one and say, “That does sound
more compelling to me.” That’s why I, on short notice, put together a few
signals that are fit for making vinyl playback difficult and tackle different
aspects of playback distortion. I don’t know how interesting that actually on
the specifics, in terms of vinyl are, but I’m just going to talk about them
anyway. It’s important to know that the distortion that is derived from vinyl
is not actually on the vinyl. It’s not something that is a part of the cutting
process, but it’s always something that is derived from playback. There’s a
multitude of different factors that make distortion and there’s different
forms. There’s space distortion. There’s tracking errors. That leads to a
situation where every playback device provides a little bit of different
distortion. Most crucially, the difference between a DJ system and a hi-fi
system that have a different cut in terms of the pickup stylus and a different
flexibility. I don’t know how to say that in English. These are stiffer than
the hi-fi systems. Hi-fi systems can follow the pinching that is derived from
the groove getting more shallow and deeper. They can respond to the pinching
better and they can also follow accelerations they receive from the sides of
the groove more precisely than DJ systems. DJ systems have one big advantage,
you can scratch. If you don’t scratch, there’s no reason to use a DJ system.
It’s a pity that most people use DJ systems, I don’t actually know why,
because that has destroyed a bit of vinyl cutting culture over the last two
decades. We always have to refer every bit of music that we put on record to
these systems that are just not really capable of playing back delicate
aspects of the high end delicate phase relations and tend to give you more
distortion or distortion at an earlier threshold or a lower threshold than hi-
fi systems. We were talking about GRM, if I put delicate signals like that,
like electro-acoustic ’70s bit of extreme signals on vinyl, I could work much
more again delicately, if I’d knew that people would listen to it on hi-fi
systems. But as I’m aware of the fact that people have these systems at home,
I have to tame the signal in a certain way that they will not just sound like
grey noise on these.
TODD L. BURNS 
Should we listen?
Rashad Becker 
This is a bit of a lengthy program. I really put it together on very short
notice and I think the running time is over 20 minutes. I don’t know if we
should listen to all of it.
TODD L. BURNS 
Yeah, maybe just some samples.
Rashad Becker 
It’s a little bit organized going a) through different bands of the spectrum,
b) from signals with less harmonics to signals that are richer in harmonics
because they do present vinyl distortion in different ways and also in
different amounts of being beneficial to the actual signal. It’s not all that
obvious. Some signals are very obviously getting quite dirty. Others have a way
more subtle touch, just get a little bit hairy, but I think it’s better to
illustrate what is problematic and to be considered when you want to release
anything on vinyl and where music can actually really benefit from living on
this format. One thing that is helpful to consider when releasing things on a
record is that the representation of the spectrum is not equally derived from
the length of the record. What I want to say is that high end signals, or
treble signals, are way better read off the outer realm of the record than the
inner realm because the way-per-time ratio shrinks dramatically to what’s the
center of the record. CDs are actually read the other way around. They start
in the middle and go to the margin and they speed up to keep a constant data
flow. A record turns at a constant speed, so the way-per-time time ratio goes
down quite dramatically. It’s way less than half of the way you have in the
middle, in the center, to modulate the same information. The impact that has
on the signal, I want to demonstrate by playing a snare drum on the outer
realm of the record. [plays record] That’s the wrong side.
[music]
Now playing back the same signal from the inner realm of the record.
[music]
You can hear it’s about three octaves missing from the upper part of the
spectrum. It’s not as dramatic and that’s what I was talking about earlier.
It’s not as dramatic as on a hi-fi system because it’s elliptically cut.
[music]
That’s a bit more tricky.
[music]
[comments] See, it’s still way less, but it’s about one octave more of
harmonics when played back with the hi-fi system. This is a phenomenon that
all records have in common. It’s system-eminent and it can’t be avoided,
really, except for you trick the program by shelving off the high end in the
beginning and then bringing it up towards the end, so you get like a seemingly
constant spectrum. One of the few reasons to cut records from the inside out is
when you have a 15-minute epic techno track that drops the first hi-hat at 12
minutes like some Basic Channel records did. Then you can cut them from the
inner to the outer side to have the hi-hat represented. Nevertheless, that was
a very crude sentence. This is how back in the days before tape was actually
invented, this is the way they handled the recording of long classical pieces
when they recorded for radio. They did that on 14-inch lacquers and they would
record the first side from the outer side to the inner, and then start on the
inside and record to the outer side to have the treble die away slowly, then
come back slowly and die away slowly again. It’s something that you usually do
not actually hear when you listen to the record. The signal starts getting
compromised about that [gestures] far into the record with the DJ system and about that [gestures]
far into the record with a hi-fi system, but you usually don’t hear it. Every
record, once you are sensibilized for it, your pickup and drop in the inner
realm, you’re going to be shocked, I guess. Something that is still nice for
DJs though because every new record that you bring in suddenly has a lot of
treble and brilliance and brings excitement. Another thing, I was just shocked
actually how much damage was done to the record by playing it back only once
with that. You might’ve realized the noise that we heard, and I really just
played it once with that record player. I try to find signals that evoke
different styles and different forms of vinyl distortion. In the beginning, I
threw in a few snares and claps and hi-hats because that’s what the young
people like. There’s a lot of records but then it gets more abstract and
things that I on short notice did on a synth to tackle the vinyl. It’s not
always nice to listen to maybe, but it’s still scientifically interesting.
Every signal starts at a level where it’s not distorted or only very little
distorted because it’s unavoidable playing it back from vinyl. Then, it gets
successively increased in level to a point where there’s maximum vinyl
distortion. As I said, sometimes it’s very, very obvious. Sometimes, it’s
quite subtle. I’m just going to start it and see for how long it carries,
actually.
[music]
Here, I don’t know, I’m sitting behind the speakers, but you should’ve been
able to hear a little bit of subharmonic distortion to the fundamental, which
is quite high up and then there’s a little “Tuck, tuck,” slowly coming in and
a little bit of phase distortion. It was a little like, I don’t know that
word, but like a little sheen that started surrounding the closed hi-hat in
the last few hits. Also, here is subharmonic distortion that bent a little bit
the fundamental, and then there was actually a suboctave slowly coming up.
[stops music]
I think there’s quite a
limit of what I can actually demonstrate here. I should maybe put that on the
Internet or something. The thing is, it’s impossible to combat because it is
so dependent on the playback situation. What I wanted to point out now is if I
change the weight a little bit, or the anti-skating a little bit on the record
player, the distortion is going to be a different one. It’s already so noisy
after playing it once that that covers up the subtleties of the distortion.
Yes, the idea of doing this is actually to show that there’s hardly any way of
combating playback distortion. Of course, I can anticipate it though,
specifically in the high and midrange, for example, and take things that are
going to be filled up by distortion on the vinyl out of the original signal
that I cut to vinyl. That would be one way. Then, taming back envelopes
because I know there’s going to be extra envelope derived from the playback as
we heard, extra attacks, and so I can take that back a little bit and let that
be filled up from distortion again. But also, as we demonstrated a little bit,
it’s very, very owing to the level that I actually put on the record, so I
have to anticipate what the cutting level is going to be already when treating
the material. That is something that happens after mastering that is done for
musical reasons as a second generation that is specifically preparing the
material for being cut to vinyl.
TODD L. BURNS 
You obviously are only cutting to vinyl, maybe not obviously. You said
Dubplates & Mastering is a vinyl-only operation?
Rashad Becker 
No, it’s not. We do CD mastering, but it’s mainly, of course, a vinyl
operation.
TODD L. BURNS 
It’s quite different when you’re mastering something for the two formats. Can
you talk a little bit about that?
Rashad Becker 
Well, the difference is there is no implications when you ask for something
for a digital format, you don’t have to deviate from what the artist asks for.
If you are aiming for any kind of digital format, there is no compromise, no
call to compromise, but there is when you cut something to vinyl. Over the
years, I have the feeling that anything that sounds musically balanced will
sound nice on vinyl, but, of course, you don’t want everything to sound
musically balanced always. That’s where it gets really difficult with vinyl
and you don’t have any issues with CD. That’s the main difference, that you do
have to do things that you wouldn’t do for artistic or musical reasons, but
that you have to do as a technical necessity.
TODD L. BURNS 
In addition to mastering, you also wanted to talk a little bit about recording
and producing.
Rashad Becker 
Yes. What I said earlier about decision-making, I think that is the benefit of
being educated through mastering is that you look at all the decisions that
have been made within the recording and the mixing process, everything that
has been done within the state of production. You can look at all that
retrospectively. I actually think it is quite a good starting point to learn
dealing with sonic processes and dealing with the technical side of music. I
think mastering is the best point to start learning. It’s a bit of a weird
curve that is established in the music industry that you start at a point
where you have no ability or no entitlement to judge on what you’re doing. I
think it’s mostly that if you want to do mastering, you work through all the
stages to the mastering stage and it should actually be the other way around.
I think and I’ve been told, I’m not sure if it’s true, that in the Motown
studios, it was done the other way around, that you started with mastering and
then went into mixing and then after mixing you went into recording. That
makes perfect sense to me, because you can see all the mistakes or
questionable decisions that were made in the context of a finished piece of
music and can actually understand them way better than when you look at single
signals that are not even music yet. I think if you start dealing with the
technical side of music, you are easily overwhelmed by making these decisions.
I think that everyone who starts putting up microphones to an instrument gets
into a certain dilemma where he or she finds him or herself overwhelmed with
memorizing what the microphone actually picks up. Then, for example, you have
a cello and then you place a mic somewhere as a starting point, you listen to
it maybe via headphones and you think, “That sounds nice, but how about over
here?” Then you go over here and you think, “That sounds nice, too. What is it
like there or was it here?” Then you already lose your feeling for your own
process because it’s really difficult to memorize sound if you’re not putting
40 hours of work into this every week. You have to find some method to make
decisions, starting with putting up a microphone, but every step of the
production chain. For example, microphone, cello, I advise to get an idea of
the narrative in the first place.
TODD L. BURNS 
What do you mean, “the narrative”?
Rashad Becker 
Yeah. The narrative that the finished piece might have. That should be what
you have in your head to start with. I’m going to try to elaborate on that.
Basically, whatever a microphone picks up is always in a certain way fiction
because it never represents anything that anyone can actually hear. A
microphone always hears completely different and picks up on different aspects
of an instrument, as a human in a room. Putting a microphone somewhere is
already in a certain way telling a story. It’s already a decision on what kind
of story you want to tell before you can make an informed judgment on where
you put the microphone. It starts with if you scan a voice. The thing is, if
you put a microphone in front of someone’s mouth and you listen through
headphones or speakers, you’re going to hear a lot of aspects that you have
been hearing before, when you were just using your ears, but you didn’t have
that kind of scrutiny, so you didn’t follow these aspects. You suddenly hear
things, the saliva, and you hear weird formants. You’ll think, “This sounds
unnatural.” Then, you go back into the room. You want to correct the
microphone and the singer talks to you and you’re like, “Oh. That’s actually
been there all the time. It is actually natural,” but you can change that by
repositioning the microphone. The narrative in that case would be like, “What
do I want to tell about this voice that I record? Do I want to make a natural
representation or do I want the voice to sound very fragile? Or do I want it
to sound very, very decisive and big.” That is something that you can
influence already in making a decision on where the microphone will be. That
should be the starting point, actually: What do you want to capture? What kind
of story do you want to tell? Before you know what you want to capture from a
certain instrument, you have to listen to the instrument excessively, I think,
before you even bother to open the drawer for a microphone you should go close
to the instrument. You should move around in the room and just make up your
mind of what you actually like about the instrument, what about the way that
the instrument is played fits the song that you want to record? Make up your
mind about what attributes you like about the sound before you even touch a
microphone. Then, once you have an idea about what you like or what you want
to achieve, and also, importantly, what you do not like about the sound. Then,
start putting up the microphone, just let it there, go into the next room
where your monitors are and see what aspects of what you would like to capture
is already present in the signal, and then go back and forth, correct it,
until you find the sweet spot. But you have to have that kind of vision before
you start placing the microphone; otherwise, you will get lost, or you will
live with something. Then, this is going to sum up in the mixing process until
you have a mix that you can live with. I think to avoid having a mix that you
can live with and having a mix that you’re really insanely happy with, you’ve
got to make up your mind what kind of story you want to tell with that mix. It
doesn’t matter what genre of music it is. Yeah, the way you want to inform
people with the sonic image the music has, that should be your first
consideration, I reckon.
TODD L. BURNS 
Maybe we should play one of your tracks from the album and use that as a
jumping off point to talk about what you were thinking and what narrative you
wanted to tell on that.
Rashad Becker 
OK. I want to say one more thing before we do that.
TODD L. BURNS 
OK, sorry.
Rashad Becker 
Just to give another example, because not everyone deals with recorded music
in that term that you put up a microphone, but the same kind of process of
what I want to say when I say “narrative” or when I say “fiction” is, for
example, if you apply reverb in your mix, then every reverb does inform every
listener in a specific way that you cannot actually necessarily predict. For
example, some people that have to publically speak in a very big, reverberated
room and hear a big reverb, get a bit megalomaniac by that and it will change
their habitus and the information that they want to provide and others get
really, really humble. This is inherent in the reverb itself, this kind of
response. This is a part also, like if you blend in some small room that
resembles the room where you spent the best years of your life, this will make
you feel very comfortable with a mix, maybe without even being aware of it. If
there’s a reverb that is more like the kitchen where your parents always were
fighting, you’re going to feel a little bit uncomfortable, but another person
who listens to that reverb is going to smell the apple pie of their
grandmother or something like this. This is all information that is an actual
narrative and is actually a part of what you offer with music. Of course, like
with every other semantic or semiotic system, you can’t pin people down in how
they’re going to receive it, but I think the outcome is going to be way more
compelling and you’re probably not going to get lost as easily if you make up
your mind before you start designing the reverb, again, what kind of a story
you want to tell. Yeah.
TODD L. BURNS 
Cool. Maybe “Dances II?” Yeah. I hope this works.
(music: Rashad Becker – “Dances II” / applause)
That was off of an album that you put out last year or the year before,
Traditional Music Of Notional Species Vol.1. This is your first album under
your own name.
Rashad Becker 
Yes.
TODD L. BURNS 
I’m curious why did it take so long? You’ve been involved in music in a very
social way for many years. What was the push that you were given or you gave
yourself to put something out?
Rashad Becker 
I think the obstacle was dealing with just a legion of recorded music, not
like feeling for myself the necessity to add something to the multitude of
recorded music. I’ve been playing live all those years, a lot in Japan,
actually. I think in the last 10 years, most of my concerts were in Japan. A
lot of them were also in China, basically in Asia more than in Europe. I’ve
always enjoyed that a lot, but I never could overcome that threshold to see
the necessity to actually put out recorded music, because it’s such a
different format and it’s something that goes into people’s lives in a
different way and so on. The push came from outside. It came from the label
basically, Bill Kouligas from PAN is an old friend and he was on my case about
putting out recorded music. That’s why I did that.
TODD L. BURNS 
Can you talk a little bit about the process of the recording and the narrative
that you had in mind when you were starting out putting this together?
Rashad Becker 
Yes, this is all synthetic, there is one recorded element, that’s the feedback
at some point. Everything else is synthetic on this record and that’s quite
precious to me, just because I’m always a bit disappointed or frustrated or
sad if synthetic processes emulate real world processes, because there’s so
much more potential in the fiction that you want to offer in synthetic
artifacts than like dealing with a cello. There’s so much preconception and so
much patina and that is just like inherent to that sound of a cello. I didn’t
want to deal with all that. It’s written as creatures in the first place in
word and then they are sonified, sitting down with the names and thinking of a
certain social diaspora that they all participate in and a certain mood or
sentiment that they share, and giving them all a little room to express
themselves, and potentially has endless compositions, but of course, they are
only four minutes long. My interest is in a conditional… I’m not so good in
arranging things and telling a story over time, so it’s more about a certain
condition that these sonic elements are in and that they could potentially
endlessly behave towards each other within. Yeah.
TODD L. BURNS 
Obviously, the mastering process, one the ideas behind it is it’s the second
pair of ears on the recorded piece of music that someone else has been
laboring over. I’m curious who mastered your record?
Rashad Becker 
Yeah. It’s really redundant if you master your own music. It’s actually not
really right, but I did cut the record myself, just because I was curious
about it. Also, with my colleagues, I didn’t want to throw it in their laps
because I thought it was an indecent move, so that’s why I did it myself, but
I know it’s not right. It makes myself a bit redundant. Yeah. 
TODD L. BURNS 
Why is it important, in a way, to get a different pair of ears? Why should
people not be mastering their own records?
Rashad Becker 
I never want to listen to music beforehand the mastering process, because I
think that’s the experience of the first encounter that really, really counts.
What I hear when I listen to a piece of music for the very first time is what
tells me how much is achieved in what the message or the story of this piece
of music is supposed to be. If I go back and if I listen to it and then I
start discussing with the author or with the artist, they’re like, “No, but
yeah, but no.” I go like, “Oh, OK.” It’s going to change my perspective in a
very privileged kind of way. That’s never going to be the privilege that
anyone else outside is going to have. To emulate the way people are going to
use that music, I need to rely on the first encounter that I have. Basically,
that’s why. Sometimes you have to make tough decisions and when you record and
mix and write your music, you’re in love with a lot of attributes that you’re
not willing to let go, but for the bigger good… is that what they say?
TODD L. BURNS 
Greater good.
Rashad Becker 
…greater good, sometimes you have to sacrifice little aspects. I didn’t feel
actually entitled or enabled to do that, so for me it was absolutely obvious
why it’s not right that I mastered it myself.
TODD L. BURNS 
I think it might be good to open it up to questions so that we can figure out
what the participants want to know about this process and what they’re
interested in. Does anyone have anything they’d like to know?
Rashad Becker 
Yes?
Audience Member 
Hello. You mentioned the balance and the frequency balance in the track. Was
that the word you used?
Rashad Becker 
Possibly, yeah.
Audience Member 
How would you describe this balance and how could I achieve it in my tracks to
get that balance? More or less, I know that there’s always some difference in
what you are looking for, like an artist, but still I have to say that if you
know the balance, then you can compare what the balance would be for you. You
know what I mean?
Rashad Becker 
I’m not sure.
Audience Member 
What I understand that you’re talking about, somehow the shape of the
frequencies in the master or in the track, so what is that reference, the
balance, what is the balance? Do you know what I mean?
Rashad Becker 
You mean when does it sound balanced? Ah, OK. I did say things that sound
musically balanced tend to sound… Yes. That’s difficult to point out. Ex
negativo, like sometimes you have a very untamed harmonic one that really
peaks out or a resonance, or mode of the room you recorded in that overshadows
the natural harmonic progression of a certain instrument you want to record.
Imagine yourself speaking in a tiny bathroom that has no towels hanging,
you’re going to hear how imbalanced your voice sounds. Is that a good example?
Audience Member 
Yeah.
Rashad Becker 
I guess it’s the same kind of thing that I said before. If you have an idea
about what you want to capture, then it’s going to be obvious to you at some
point what is a good balance between the fundamental and harmonics or between
one instrument and the other one in the mix, but there’s no idea of right or
wrong beyond your own vision, I want to say. When I said a “musically balanced
sonic image,” that tried to say like with not insanely loud hi-hats that sit
above everything or certain small peaks that really, really stick out.
Sometimes, though, they can be musically desired and then the medium just has
to deal with it.
Audience Member 
But there is a relation, for instance, between low frequencies and high
frequencies that you can somehow know. Is there a relation which you consider
more or less right to achieve?
Rashad Becker 
I think there’s ideas about this. I would personally absolutely not want to
encourage you to follow up on these ideas. I have no idea.
[laughter]
TODD L. BURNS 
Why do you say that?
Rashad Becker 
Because I think that’s really a bad input to music culture if people have an
idea about what is a balanced mix. I think every mix, as I said before, it
sounds very pretentious, I realize that, but I think every mix is in a certain
way fiction. We were talking about tension before. There’s ways to deal with
language that are very, very wrong and uncommon, but they’re still really
interesting and good artifacts. You’ve got to develop your own idea of what
kind of artifact you want to present. Within that, there’s a lot now, much
more I think, stigmas and idioms about what’s wrong and what’s right in a mix
than it used to be maybe 20 years ago. I think that is a sad thing. I want to
encourage people to totally find something that works for them. Yeah.
TODD L. BURNS 
Are there any other questions?
Audience Member 
Hi. I just wanted to know, in Melbourne at least, it’s increasingly popular
with mastering, as more people are working in home studios that are quite
biased in the way they sound to have their mastering engineer do a final
balance of the mix before going to mastering.
Rashad Becker 
Oh, yeah?
Audience Member 
I was just wondering if that’s something that you’ve been involved in or what
your thoughts on that additional process might be?
Rashad Becker 
You mean, the mastering engineer did the final stage of the mix?
Audience Member 
Yeah. It’s a really popular thing now in Melbourne to do.
TODD L. BURNS 
In where?
Audience member 
In Melbourne, Australia.
TODD L. BURNS 
OK, yeah.
Audience member 
Instead of handing in a stereo master, you hand in the multitrack session. As
much as the artist or the engineer has got it to sound how they want the final
piece to sound, and then the mastering engineer will clean a few things up
from the individual tracks before [mastering].
Rashad Becker 
It should still be two different processes. It could be the same person.
There’s this element that I was pointing to earlier with the precious moment
of the first encounter. That is missing from the process, but it should still
be two completely different processes. Then, there’s no problem if it’s the
same person. I did that on a bunch of productions that I did the recording,
the mixing and the mastering, but I had my mind still set to… The mix is where
you put together the music and the mastering is where you put together all the
pieces as one. The side that you have or the view that you have or the
attitude that you have when putting together the mix should be specific to
that piece of music that you’re dealing with.
Audience Member 
Oh, yeah. I see. Yeah.
Rashad Becker 
It can be beneficial. Personally, when the offer comes, like I could also send
you the multitrack and I tend to say no, because I want to presume that what I
get is something where like all decisions have been made, and then if there’s
real trouble and I get into trouble with the processing. It’s like, “Look, I
see where you’re pointing at, but it’s difficult to derive it from what you
delivered,” then it might make sense to go back to the multitracks, but from a
mastering perspective, not from a mixing perspective.
Audience Member 
Yeah. Thank you.
Audience Member 
Hello, Rashad. Thanks for being here. It was really informative. I have two
questions, you could say three. First of all, how many hours do you spend
every day on mastering and do you have like ear fatigue after a certain point?
Even from the demonstration record that you played us, after some seconds,
things started sounding a little bit weird.
Rashad Becker 
So loud. Wasn’t that so loud?
Audience Member 
Does it inform the way that you work in general? The second question is why
are 180 gram records considered audiophile, in comparison to the 140? Can you
explain the mechanics behind it? The third question is, if somebody can buy
the demonstration record that you brought here, because it sounded really
nice?
Rashad Becker 
Well, already it’s not going to sound that nice anymore, as we heard. No, I
guess no.
Audience Member 
OK.
Rashad Becker 
Then, the first question, it depends. If you ask for a day sometimes you work
with an artist, it’s one project. It’s a lot to go through, but the artist
came on a flight from Tokyo, for example, to Berlin to master. Then you might
end up sitting down 16 hours or something like this to get through it.
Audience Member  
Your perception doesn’t change after 12 hours, like how you perceive it,
because you get used to the sound and all that?
Rashad Becker 
There’s a couple of factors at play; a) you have to be careful about making
pauses and changing the volume a lot, b) I get used to certain masks that my
ears put on. For example, after flying or after listening to music for 10
hours and I know the fatigue and I can, without analyzing it too much
meanwhile subtract or add because I always have one reference, that’s my
voice. If I speak, I always hear what my voice sounds like for me. I realize,
“Oh, OK. It’s wearing down here or… “ Also, my voice changes, of course, but
then I know one day I have a concept of what my voice sounds like. If this
deviance from what my voice should sound like and what it actually sounds like
to me right now, that I can bring into the music process also. Sometimes, like
when you fly a lot and you have to perform, mix something the same day, your
ears are in really poor condition. So I rely on that a lot, actually. Another
thing is I use my face a lot in response to the frequencies. Of course, it’s
bullshit, but sometimes I feel like I don’t even need my ears so much because
I have quite a defined map of frequencies in my face that I use to memorize.
When I listen to a piece prior to mastering, there’s certain peaks coming up
and I have to memorize them all, so I address them to certain spots in my face
and with my tongue and in my mouth, and…
Audience Member  
Whoa, whoa.
Rashad Becker 
Actually, you know what? That’s not so special. It’s what every brass player
does all the time. It’s like body memory that everyone who deals with a non-tempered instrument. Specifically what you do with your tongue and your mouth
and your lips, it’s quite a finely tuned system of body memory. It’s not so
hilariously difficult to set up. You can learn it. I realized that actually
not too long ago that because I also play trombone, badly, but I realized that
what I do when I listen to music and analytically listen to music, it’s the
reverse process of what a trombone player does when he plays music. There’s a
totally defined position of my tongue in my mouth for a certain frequency that
I can memorize when I listen to someone’s music. I don’t think it’s sorcery.
It’s quite easy at the end, just training.
TODD L. BURNS 
Second question? What was the second question?
Audience Member  
The 180 grams pressings.
TODD L. BURNS 
Yep, the 140, 180.
Rashad Becker 
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, the 180 has the potential of being flatter. Then,
there’s also a lot of other stuff that I think might be total and utter
bullshit, but I don’t have the time to even consider it. But people speak
about the resonance of the material. People say you can cut louder if you use
180 grams. That is, of course, absolutely not true because the cutting depth
is an average of 70 micrometers and even 120 or 90 as is common in the US, 90
grams vinyl is already like 1.5 millimeters or plenty of space. It’s
definitely less warped and the warp has a certain pinching distortion. It
introduces a pinching distortion to the signal. That’s the benefit of 180
grams.
Audience Member  
Thank you. Thanks a lot.
TODD L. BURNS 
Before we go to the next question, I just wanted to ask, the trombone, what
drew you to that instrument in particular? Why did you pick that one up?
Rashad Becker 
Because it has some kind of a certain tragic, comical… It always sounds
sincere to me, but it can sound really, really tragic in a comical way that I
realize is something that I… Actually, I just realized a lot of things that I
look for in synthetic colors I can actually just play them on a trombone. It’s
the microtonal quality of it.
TODD L. BURNS 
Maybe Volume 2 will be your trombone record?
Rashad Becker 
No. No, but I play. I’m writing for a small ensemble. I’m writing pieces for
trombone and theremin. And the idea is that both instruments get played at the
same time, so whenever the glissando, like when the pitch falls on the
trombone, you move towards the theremin and the pitch rises in the theremin
and then there is a battery of vocoders where half of them, the trombone
vocodes the theremin and the other half the other way around. It’s a harmonic
fiasco. It’s really intriguing, but hard to play.
TODD L. BURNS 
Any more questions?
Audience Member  
What are the relationships between the material that has been used for cutting
the record and the sound and the expression of the sound of the record itself?
Rashad Becker 
Basically, a rule of thumb, the clearer the vinyl, the smaller the longevity,
the faster it wears off. Black vinyl is definitely the most endurable. As far
as I know, there’s no relation between the initial sound quality and the color
of the vinyl, but clear vinyl wears off way faster than black vinyl. Picture
discs sound rather inferior from the beginning because we actually have the
picture imprinted on the record on the outside of the record, so you playback
like a foil that is on the record. If you think of the dimensions that we are
dealing with, that’s always going to change the sound. But if you do a picture
disc, you have a good reason for that and it’s probably not so precious about
the sound. Yeah, dark vinyl is the most endurable.
Audience Member  
Thanks.
Audience Member  
I was wondering if you could maybe give us a tip on maybe somethings, that
maybe we shouldn’t put things on the master bus before we send it to
mastering, things that make your job much harder? If you can tell us or maybe
give us a tip on what not to do? Just broad. I know all music is different.
Rashad Becker 
Yeah.
Audience Member  
Maybe there’s some broad things you can tell us to make a mastering engineer’s
job a little easier.
Rashad Becker 
Generally, whatever you do for a musical reason, do it, whatever it is.
Whatever you do because you think you should do it, maybe don’t do it. I think
that’s probably enough as a rule of thumb. One thing in particular that I want
to point to is the Waves Maximizer L1, L2, L3 and whatever generation is
there, please don’t use it. It’s beneficial. It’s a good tool if you do
multimedia applications for advertisements or something, but it should be kept
away from music with a restriction order.
[laughter]
Audience Member  
I’m so glad to hear you say that. Thank you.
TODD L. BURNS 
Assuming you set an interview with
Monolake,
which goes to your question, is the closer the sound node is to what it’s
supposed to be, the harder it is to master?
Rashad Becker 
Sometimes yes, yeah, because it’s more fragile. It’s easier if you can really
carve into something. If you feel like, “Yeah, I know where this is pointing
to, but it’s really, really messed up by a lot of redundance,” then carving
into that is always going to be a little improvement. If something is really
delicate and balanced but just like this one harmonic is a bit too strong, you
tame that back and then, “Oh, shit. Now it’s this harmonic.” I think it’s
quite generalizable the more achieved the mix, the longer at least it takes to
master, at least for me. Already the listening process, the delay before I
touch the piece, is longer when I think, “Oh, this mix sounds really good.”
Yeah.
Audience Member  
Hi. I just wanted to touch on the bass and I read in another interview with
you about bass that it doesn’t necessarily need to be in mono, which I think
is a rule that I’ve been following for a while. But then you have some
people’s work like, DJ Sprinkles’ Midtown 120 Blues springs to mind where she said that she
couldn’t actually press it onto vinyl and it needs to be on CD because of the
phasing in the chorus that she had used on the bass. I was just wondering
where the line is and any tips you have on what to do when applying it to
vinyl?
Rashad Becker 
Yeah, it’s difficult to verbally draw a line. I don’t know how many records
I’ve cut, but definitely more than 5,000, maybe way more, I really don’t know
precisely, there was one where I said, “OK, this is going to influence the
music too strongly. It’s going to take away too much. Maybe consider a CD
release.” That was something where it was a 50 hertz bass that just went
“Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom,” exclusively. It was from a song on Raster-Noton a long time ago. Usually, I would want to encourage you to really not
bother about it because this is one of the many uniforming myths that make
people, all musicians, producers, aim towards the same sound because, “I heard
that works better. I heard this does not work.” People copy these ideas off
each other and it turns into more and more preconceived and expectable sound.
If there is, indeed, problems, there’s very elegant ways to deal with them
that will not compromise the music. There’s elliptical EQs and you can supply
a band selective compressor in the side signal. You can easily deal with low
bass phase without destroying the music. I think spatial dimension or spatial
expansion in the bass is really, really precious as an element in putting
together a mix. So I don’t want to discourage you from dealing with it or
using it in your compositional process. I don’t know. Maybe this is derived
from really industry kind of cuts because a lot of cuts to vinyl are actually
made without even monitoring the signal. I don’t want to say that…
TODD L. BURNS 
Derogatory.
Rashad Becker 
Derogatory, yeah, yeah, yeah. It’s just like cutting rooms. Then, you set your
parameters and then sometimes maybe the elliptical EQ that you have on the
cutting desk cannot handle that signal, so you go, “No, we can’t treat that.
Sorry.” If you have the right tools and you put a little effort into it, it’s
no problem. There’s a lot of phase and on this there is quite a lot. There
would have been examples, also. But don’t think about it too much and let the
cutting room deal with.
Audience Member  
Thank you. Just one more really quickly. I’ve been taking the top end off my
hi-hats. Not all of it, but just the top two kilohertz just because I read
that if you leave that on the vinyl, you get this high piercing ring. Are you
saying that I shouldn’t really bother because that’s going to happen anyway
because that’s just the distortion?
Rashad Becker 
It’s the same question or it’s the same answer that I might give. Don’t let
post-production rule your creative process. I think the medium has to deal
with the information and not the other way around, but of course, as a very
broad rule of thumb, the broader and the longer the steady state in a hi-hat
system, if it’s like a classic, [makes white noise sound] “Tshshsh,” this is
a problem for vinyl. The finer and the shorter, the more interesting
distortion you derive from it. You get that on a lot of old electro cuts or
some computer dub cuts where you have these really tonal, very short, hi-hats.
If you listen to these as opposed to mid-’90s techno hi-hats, they sing and
they have a sheen to them. We have spatial expansion that goes beyond the
speakers, which is really cool vinyl distortion, whereas the mid-’90s techno
hi-hats just give you some rectangular gray mess that hits you here.If you
want to take it into account, then make them more narrow and shorter, but of
course you shouldn’t. If you want to tell a story with a hi-hat that goes,
“Tshshsh,” then you should do that. There’s ways of coping with it in the
cutting room.
Audience Member 
OK. Thank you.
Audience Member 
Can you tell us how remastering works? Were you involved in the Bullwackies
series on Basic Channel?
Rashad Becker 
No.
Audience Member 
I don’t know how the story is, but I think they went to pick up some old tapes
and old records and then remastered it. Almost all the work for those releases
was in the mastering. How does it work?
Rashad Becker 
I think Moritz [von Oswald] did these. I’m not entirely sure, but they were done at
our place and I think Moritz from Basic Channel did that remastering. But
basically, mastering and remastering is the same thing. Technically speaking,
it’s…
Audience Member
It’s on top of the master that [already existed]?
Rashad Becker 
Maybe the used the old premasters and did new masters? Actually, I can’t tell
you about that specific process because I don’t know.
TODD L. BURNS 
You’ve worked on the GRM things, maybe that’s a good example of were you
working from tapes or…
Rashad Becker 
No, I did not. I was not. I worked from digital files. I think they were
considered remasters, but to me it was just mastering. In the approach,
there’s nothing specific in remastering, only maybe if you have the old
masters and they work great, but you can’t have any access to them anymore.
You only have the old premasters, then you could take the old masters as a
reference. That’s something that sometimes happens. You have a record. It is
supposed to be re-released but the old lacquers, like the mothers from the
pressing plant, they are destroyed, so you take the record as a reference
because you still have the original tape. People are really fond of the sound
of the original release, so you take that as a reference and try to bring the
premaster to the same spot. That would be a specific application, but
generally, there’s no remastering as a technique of its own. Yeah.
Audience Member
Only one short last question. When you do the mix, there are some sounds that
are louder than others and the mastering brings sometimes the sounds that are
not so loud and on top more in the front. Is there any compressor
configuration that I can put in? For instance, in my master, when I’m doing
the mix to have an idea of what would happen in the master just to understand
what could change before I send the premaster? Do you know what I mean?
Rashad Becker 
Yeah. I mean, there’s likely going to be some limiting. It’s very difficult to
anticipate the mastering stage, but you can always, of course, also influence
the mastering stage by addressing the mastering engineer and expressing what
you would ideally hope for to be achieved, but if you want to see how your mix
changes when the dynamic range gets smaller, you could try to mix into a
limiter for a little while or into a combined stage of compression limiting. I
think that is a really advanced application. Mixing into a dynamic processor
is something really difficult and I wouldn’t advise to do it. If you want to
get a short idea of how the mix changes, that is something maybe that you
could do. Of course, a good mastering process would involve to antagonize the
spectrum changes that you derive from dynamic processes with EQ prior to the
dynamic processes, like anticipate how the spectrum is going to change from
the dynamic change and then take that out of the signal, so that the spectrum
is pretty much the same after the dynamic processes. Yeah.
Audience Member 
I got one here. Just to come back to your premaster preparation, what are a
few of the most obvious things that happen when people are giving you files
that you have problems with where you just wish that people knew a bit more
about it? Because I’ve been in a few mastering sessions and every time I
learnt something new. I’m just wondering if you can fast forward for people
that haven’t been in those sessions to things that were very obvious to you,
but maybe if people are just running stuff for the first time, obviously
they’re limiting things, but just more in terms of stereo phasing, are having
a lot of problems with that?
Rashad Becker 
Actually, there’s not so many. As I said, any maximizing is useless. It makes
touching the material extremely difficult, borderline impossible. Avoid
maximizers. If you do limiting, be sure you know the reasons why you want to
do it. There can be good reasons, but be sure you have them and do not
rectify. That’s basically it. Everything in terms of phase and everything that
constitutes the spectrum of the signal, that’s all artistic decisions and they
shouldn’t be made in the light of mastering. Personally, I think they
shouldn’t even be made in the light of vinyl mastering, because it’s just too
difficult to anticipate that stuff if you’re not a vinyl mastering engineer.
Yeah. Don’t do anything that you do not have a good reason for.
Audience Member 
It might’ve been answered already. I assume, a lot of people do two kinds of
mastering. They do master for the digital release and they do a master for a
vinyl release. Do you prefer people giving you the digital master for your
vinyl mastering or the stage it’s at before?
Rashad Becker 
Actually, honestly, I prefer the premaster. I do one master that is musically
valid and that’s going to be the digital master at the same time, but that’s
going to be the master. Then, when cutting the vinyl, I might have to do a few
corrections to the master for the transfer to vinyl. With all the things that
I shortly outlined with anticipating vinyl distortion, that’s generally easier
in the premaster, I guess, than in a limited mastered version. Ideally, if
there is a digital master that is done in a different studio and that everyone
involved is really, really fond of, I’d like to have that as a reference and
the premaster at the same time. That would be ideal. If that’s not possible,
then I will work with the master, not with the premaster.
TODD L. BURNS 
Are there any other questions?
Audience Member 
Hi. I’d like to first find out, anyone else still buying the vinyl, put your
hands [in the air], please. Oh, pretty nice. How do you think about the future
of the vinyl? And one more question is, have you heard about half-speed
cutting?
Rashad Becker 
Yeah. That makes a lot of sense. I did try it a few times, but it’s not a
usual production standard anymore. It can be beneficial, just quickly, because
one of the biggest limitations with the transfer to vinyl is the insane
accelerations that the cutting head is informed with or has to produce to
represent the music that it’s informed with. It gets really hot while going
like this 25,000 times a second. You have to cool it with gas and then
sometimes the fuse blows and that sets the limit to what you can actually put
on vinyl. If you do half-speed mastering, the frequency’s only going to be
half as high, so that is obviously beneficial. The outcome is going to be the
same, but you can put more adventurous signals on the vinyl. Then, of course,
you’re not really in control of the playback distortion. You can, of course,
test cut but I don’t think it is a standard application in any mastering
studio anymore. The reason why I wouldn’t do it more regularly is because I do
not want to transfer everything to tape, because I’m not so fond of tape. I do
not want a sample rate conversion of the material or playback, just like tune
it down because I don’t trust that so much, but I tried it a few times, just
for scientific interest, not for an actual master that I sent out, but it used
to be standard.
TODD L. BURNS 
Why are you not so fond of tape?
Rashad Becker 
That’s a lengthy…
TODD L. BURNS 
We can maybe talk about that afterwards then. Are there any more questions?
OK. I think Rashad will be here for a little bit. If you do have any
questions, please feel free to come up and ask him formally, but for now,
thank you so much for being here, Rashad.
