Richie Hawtin has always pushed the envelope: he started Plus 8 Records with John Acquaviva at the turn of the '90s, formed the M-nus empire, and developed Final Scratch. His works under the F.U.S.E. guise, the delicious desolation of Plastikman, countless remixes, and his groundbreaking works with the Concept series and the Decks, EFX & 909 compilation are all firmly planted in techno's history. A fierce advocate of developing technology as long as it doesn't detract from the physical experience of community, he's continued to operate at the limits, whether it be via his wifi-enabled CONTAKT event series or his successful Ibiza night ENTER. Even after decades in the game, Richie Hawtin lives in the moment, on the cusp of the future.
In his 2013 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, Hawtin reflected on making trips to Derrick May’s house, founding Plus 8, throwing parties, and more.
Todd L. Burns
I’d like to go ahead and introduce a man who needs little introduction to
techno fans around the world, Mr. Richie Hawtin.
Richie Hawtin 
Hi.
[applause]
Todd L. Burns
Most of your music is quite long and often times in the context of an album
and needs to be heard in that context, as you have said in the past. However,
we are going to go ahead and play a track anyway, and a track in full. So
let’s enjoy a track before we begin. This is called “Spastik.”
(music: Plastikman – “Spastik”)
Richie Hawtin 
Well, I wasn’t sweating before we started, now I am.
[applause]
Todd L. Burns
I didn’t play that full thing to be annoying or anything, or tedious.
Richie Hawtin 
I don’t think I’ve heard it the whole thing like that fully probably since I
recorded it. [laughs]
Todd L. Burns
Well, I wanted to ask you, recording that, you did that live as a live take.
What was the process?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, it reminds me of how hands-on the recording process was because it was, only,
if I remember right, a 909 and an 808 drum machine, and probably some 707 in there. But that was it, so it was just me jamming with those three instruments. And you hear at the end that it’s, you’re playing with the tuning and decays of the different snares, and
also, later playing with just the EQs and using every kind of knob and button
and fader on the mixer, on those three instruments to try and make something
that was engaging for what felt like 20 minutes. [laughs] But actually, the
original song was like much of my music that I was recording at that point
about a half-an-hour, 45-minute jam. Just press start, and see where it went.
And usually, in those jam sessions, I would get a really good beginning and
then somewhere in the middle I’d get a good jam part and then I’d have a good
ending, and that’s pretty much what happened there. I think there was a little
edit at the beginning, and then there was another edit to put the end on, but
pretty much what you hear is what happened for those 35, 40 minutes in my
studio.
Todd L. Burns
So a lot of the early stuff was completely live jams, and why was that the
process, why were you going for 45 minutes?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, there was a computer running the clock on that, like an old Atari ST, but… You know, you follow the people and the influences around you, by following what you see. I used to go to Detroit and see some people making music, Derrick May and Kevin Saunderson and these guys and they all did their things by playing live and jamming. Again, most of the instruments you couldn’t actually sequence. You could only sequence in very simple terms, so there was really no way to sit on a computer
screen and plan everything out. And later on, when I did try to do that it
never felt actually real. It felt too manufactured. So I always just followed
that thing of getting all the machines running, even when there was some
computer stuff, having some loops on the computer screen, or whatever, but
then just turning it all on, and doing most of the construction and the arrangement live by moving faders and muting or turning things on the machines. Like, I think a couple of times you can hear things coming in and
you can feel that push and pull of the faders or the knobs on the 808.
Todd L. Burns
Definitely gives a dynamism that doing something not-live wouldn’t have.
Richie Hawtin 
No, when I was listening to this, it reminds me of how I DJ now. Of course,
there’s preplanning, but I do as much live as possible. I love having this
controller ‘cause it has this knob on, and that controller, and I have something
else over here, and I’m constantly manipulating and trying to work this energy
level, and I’m just kind of flying by the seat of my pants. And that’s exactly
what that was.
Todd L. Burns
So you said, this is something you saw people in Detroit doing. Where were you coming from?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, yeah, it’s also the equipment. That was recorded in 1992, I think. It came out in ’93, so around that time. So again, I had an Atari ST, most of the equipment wasn’t fully MIDI, so there really wasn’t a way to plan everything out. I was traveling a little bit in the UK and some of the producers I met
over there had more money and they had newer computers and they were putting
everything out in these arrangement windows and I liked their records. But I
didn’t always like the feeling of the records. And especially, if I tried to
do what they were doing, it always lost the feeling of what I was trying to
get to, so… And I love the feeling of all those Detroit records, you know? I used
to go to Derrick May’s house, and he’d have [gesturing] his kitchen here and over here you’d have basically like this, actually, always on the floor, you know, a couple of 909 drum machines, some other things, and the mixer. And it was always running. Every time I went to his house there was something running. And then, sometimes he’d go over and like turn something off and bring
something up, and I was like, “I guess that’s how he records.” You know, and the one thing that we all did was we had access to reel-to-reel 2-track tapes, so there was some post-production. We would record, like I said, for half an hour, 45 minutes. You know, I remember some of my other tracks were actually recorded over two DAT tapes, so they were like, 90 minutes long. And then I
would just go back and find the pieces that I liked and turn that into an arrangement. But it was never like cutting and splicing so much that you started to take the life, it was always two or three edits, and kind of
highlighting the best parts of what you had captured, where the live feeling really came out.
Todd L. Burns
So you’re in Windsor, Canada, and you’re going to Detroit to Derrick May’s
house. So you grew up in Windsor, for the most part. When did you learn that
there is this music happening in the city?
Richie Hawtin 
Windsor in Canada is a very small place, so if you think you’re different, or
you want to be different, you very quickly have to cross over into America and
into Detroit for other opportunities. I started going there, I think, before
it was for records, it was for like resale shopping, because there was really
big places where you could find really cool clothes. And then that went from
the resale shop and next door there was a place called Off the Record. There
was a small record store in Windsor, but that cool group of… I don’t know,
we thought we were cool. A little group of people were picking over those
records, so if you wanted to have a record that nobody else had, you went to
Detroit. If you wanted to have clothes that looked a little different, you
went to Detroit. And so that just kind of became my weekend thing to do. I
didn’t really find music being played in the nightclubs in Windsor. At that
point it was actually more concerts. So I was into Skinny Puppy, Severed
Heads, Front 242, these
people were coming to Detroit and playing. So it was always going to Detroit.
If you didn’t go there, it was pretty boring in Windsor.
Todd L. Burns
And it’s pretty close as well. It’s just right across the bridge.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, it’s like North to South London, or like, Manhattan to Brooklyn. In about
15 minutes from my house, which was outside of Windsor, I could be through the
tunnel or over the bridge. The people in that area call Windsor a suburb of Detroit, so it wasn’t like a big journey. You know, it was an adventure, though.
Todd L. Burns
You started DJing in a club in Detroit?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, um… I was collecting these records, so I kind of was known in this group of friends in Windsor. There’s actually a lot of Windsor kids who wouldn’t go to Detroit.
Todd L. Burns
Why is that?
Richie Hawtin 
This was like mid ‘80s and still, I think, up until 1979, 1980 Detroit was the
murder capital of America. Which wasn’t a very good advertising campaign for
Windsor moms and dads to go to Detroit. And so, you know…
Todd L. Burns
Convincing your parents to let you go there must have been tough.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah. You know, I was born in England. I went to Canada in 1979 and so when we got there, it was like, here’s Windsor, here’s Detroit. That was our area to explore. So even before I was going there by myself, my mom and dad would take us over there shopping, going to a mall, going to a cool breakfast place. You
know, they just wanted to take in this whole new environment that we had just
put ourselves into. And so that was my mentality too. You know, explore your
surroundings. Whereas a lot of other kids, their parents wouldn’t go there,
so, you had the rebels that would go there ‘cause their parents wouldn’t go
there. But a lot of kids were just like, it was so “You don’t go to Detroit.”
So, back to collecting records; there was a group of kids in Windsor who
wanted to hear good music who wouldn’t go over there, and nobody would give me
a job, so I was like, “Let’s put on a dance party.” It was like ’86, ’87… And all my friends came down to hear cool music. And the club owners were like, “This is amazing. You filled our club when we’re empty. You want to play every week?” So I said, “Sure, I’ll play every week,” and all my friends came for
like the first week and the second week. And the third week some people didn’t come and the fourth week wasn’t so many people. And then the fifth week it’s, “Yeah, well, where are all my friends?” And then I didn’t have a job anymore.
[laughter]
And I wasn’t a very good DJ, I just had really good records.
Todd L. Burns
It’s half the battle.
Richie Hawtin 
Which is half the battle, exactly. Especially, at that point, you know, music is so
accessible now, at that point it was very hard to find those records. What it
did teach me was that I was an introverted shy kid, I wasn’t very good at
getting up in front of people and talking and all this stuff. But being in a
DJ booth I could control this crowd and take them on this experience and just
have fun playing cool music. And I was, in a way, the center of attention, but
not completely the center of attention. It’s not like I was on stage with a
guitar or something. So it was a really interesting dynamic for me. And those
three or four weeks where we did these gigs, it really kind of pushed that
home. And after losing the job, I basically went into my basement and just
practiced to become a better DJ. But that was really the point of no return. I
tasted something that I really, really, really enjoyed.
Todd L. Burns
What was the club in Detroit that really inspired you, to try to get another
job as a DJ? Or were you just looking for anything at that point, where you
could play?
Richie Hawtin 
I probably was looking for anything. [laughs] But one of the clubs I used to go to, one of the venues was called
Saint Andrew’s Hall. And that’s where I was seeing people like Nitzer Ebb and
all that kind of electronic Gothic alternative music. And downstairs they had
this club called The Shelter. I actually started going there before I was 18,
they had a thing called teen night. So this was really cool, like a teen night
just for weird kids who wanted to wear black and eyeliner, who were 15 and 16.
[laughter]
I still think that was a really cool thing. I don’t know if it exists anymore.
Maybe I’m just so old that I don’t realize it. [laughs] But I started going
to that, and then I got fake ID and then started going there and just going to listen to DJs. There was another club down the street called the Majestic
Theater where Blake Baxter, another well-known Detroit producer, was playing.
And just started being part of the scene. I didn’t, it wasn’t me who got my first job. I
had a very beautiful blonde girlfriend who thought I was the hottest DJ in the
world. I still couldn’t mix worth shit, but she thought I was a bomb. And she bugged the owner of The Shelter so much that he basically gave me a job or a tryout to stop her harassing him.
[laughter]
Todd L. Burns
Well, it’s important to have these types of people in your life.
[laughter]
A number of people can be very important later on.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, but I think the point with that was that I loved doing my DJing, but I
wasn’t that confident. I wasn’t the kid to say, “You need to book me, I’m the
bomb,” or whatever, so it was if she hadn’t stepped in front of me and been my
first cheerleader, fan club and booking agent I wouldn’t have gotten anywhere.
Todd L. Burns
Who else did you meet there, aside from everyone, who else was very important
later on?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, there was a couple clubs like Majestic, Shelter, that were focused on electronic music, not just techno, not just house music, there was also Siouxsie and the Banshees, anything kind of alternative. So people were kind of gravitating there. Actually, there was this one crazy guy, he used to run
around. He was my second biggest fan, his name was Kenny Larkin. My DJ name at the time was Richie Rich, so he would run around and I was playing the very beginning when nobody was there. So it was me playing to nobody except Kenny running around, screaming my name, Richie Rich, getting everyone hyped up. And then, later Kenny became one of the artists we signed to my first record
label, Plus 8. At the same club John Acquaviva used to come down every couple
of weeks, Daniel Bell used to come down. So the foundation was being laid by the people who were coming.
Todd L. Burns
Tell me about starting that record label. At what point did you know, “We gotta have a label”?
Richie Hawtin 
I remember at that point there was a really important [remix service], it was
called DMC, Disco Mix Club. It was a really big thing in the UK and they would
have DJs… Basically, what that showed us what we thought was it didn’t
matter how good you were as a DJ, if you wanted to make it in an international
scene, you needed to do a record, or something. This DMC club took DJs and
made mega-mixes, so that was kind of our fist angle. John had a studio, also in
Canada, we started getting together to crete this Detroit techno mega-mix. Our
plan was, we are going to make this mega-mix, get on DMC, the world’s going to
discover us and we are going to make it to the next step. We never actually
finished the mix but it got us into the studio working together, and starting
to make music that we thought was really cool. And then I started to play it
to some of the other people in the Detroit area. I don’t know if I actually
ever played it to Derrick or Kevin or Juan Atkins, but their
friends… Everybody had their circles. Kind of played it to some of those people and nobody was really that interested. And it just came back down at one point, if we didn’t do it ourselves, we weren’t really gonna go anywhere.
Todd L. Burns
Were people like Derrick, Juan and Kevin sort of like deities at that point? Or were they just guys that you knew from seeing around?
Richie Hawtin 
I think that they were more well-known overseas. I remember at that point
Derrick and all of them were going and playing Sunrise events in the UK, but
it was pretty low key. Kevin used to come down and be like, “Here’s a pre-
acetate of the new Inner City,” or something they were working on, “check this
out.” So it was a really cool, relaxed time. You know, The Shelter held 200
people. Around that time Derrick and those guys opened The Music Institute,
which was considered to be the kind of epicenter in the world of techno music,
and that was about 150 people, so it wasn’t like there was a mass explosion of
Detroit techno. You were hearing it on the radio a little bit with Jeff Mills
and some other people, but it was still very underground or not so well-known.
Todd L. Burns
Why don’t we play an early Plus 8 release, just a little bit of one? This is called “Elements Of Tone.”
(music: States Of Mind – “Elements Of Tone (Richie’s Dream Mix)”)
What do you remember about recording that?
Richie Hawtin 
Listening to it now reminds me that, you know, that’s one of the first tracks
that John and I recorded. But it actually has all the elements that we reused
or I reused in my F.U.S.E. records and built upon with Plastikman. You’ve got
an 808, you’ve got some kind of choir, string and then you’ve got the 303 in the background. But what I remember is also, there’s a couple samples in there, and I think we had an Akai S900 samplers. I think we had one second or two seconds we were able to sample so it was really like, “OK, what can we do with that time?” And then,
“What can we like play with one finger over a scale that sounds interesting?”
Todd L. Burns
You said the 303, which seems to be the instrument for you over the years. Is
that the way you see it as well?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, I remember those early sessions with John, turning on a Roland TR-909
drum machine which is also in there. And actually, the hi-hat pattern in there
is totally me trying to do a Derrick May hi-hat pattern. So we turned on this
909 in and he’s like, “Play with this.” And as soon as I pressed start, it
sounded like all these Derrick May records that I was totally in love with. I
had a lot of those firsts, finding out, “Oh, this is a Juan Atkins machine.
This is a Derrick May machine.” And then taking those machines and trying to
imitate my favorite records by those guys. And then slowly finding that I
wasn’t very good at that, and then maybe putting that machine away and then
kind of taking missteps into a journey that ended up finding the right pieces,
that I actually felt connected with. That’s what took me down to the Roland
TB-303 machine, because at the same time I was really being into Detroit
techno, which was mostly 909s, 808s, DX100s, ProOnes… I was also really into
Chicago acid house, which was, again, some of those machines, but more 707 and
303s. And most of what Plastikman became was 303, 707, 909, a bit of
the… In my mind, at least what I thought I was trying to do when I look back
at it, kind of the hi-hats and clatter and futuristic notes of Detroit and
Derrick, and Kevin more so. And the acidic hypnotic trippiness of Phuture and Bam Bam, and all that early stuff. And also, throw in some UK acid house there, ‘cause I was really into that. I used to have pants with smiley faces all over me. It was pretty bad.
[laughter]
Todd L. Burns
Plus 8 early on was really interesting, I guess, in the sense that it was very
international quite quickly. Why did that happen so quickly? I mean, a lot of
it’s accidents, I suppose.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, it was an accident. I guess, what John and I noticed was that we were
part of the Detroit scene, but we were always outsiders. So we weren’t from
Detroit, but we were hanging there and doing our thing.
Todd L. Burns
You got into a little bit of trouble with the first release.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, well, ‘cause we stamped on the first record, “Two White Kids From
Canada,” with a red stamp saying “The Future Sound of Detroit.”
[laughter]
There’s still some people today that want my head for that.
[laughter]
At that point, when we did that, we felt very part of that scene. But after
that, we did feel that, “OK, maybe we’re not as part of that scene as we
thought we were.” And we could really see Metroplex and Juan Atkins had their
camp, Derrick had his camp and his friends and so, it came back to us, “OK,
who are our friends? What can we do here?” And Daniel Bell was another
Canadian who was coming down to Detroit every weekend to play music and listen
to music. You know, Kenny was from Detroit, but we were all bonded by our love
of Detroit techno. We used to drive around the freeways, Kenny and I,
listening to Derrick May tapes on repeat. Like, not talking, just like
smiling, turning it up, and trying to feel part of what was happening. So, as
we started to grow with Plus 8, we wanted to find our own family and we wanted
to find other people around the world who were in the same boat as us. Perhaps
not from Detroit, but heavily inspired by Detroit. So that first few records,
you know, Kenny was from Detroit, so we were like, “OK, Detroit on the label.”
John was from London, Ontario, so we put London – most people thought it was
London, England – and then, we started to get demo tapes from around the world. One of the first demo tapes we got was from Holland, from a guy Speedy J, Jochem Paap, and so Rotterdam was on the label. So very early on, where most labels at that point, were very regional, you had this Plus 8 record that
said, London, Detroit, Rotterdam, and there is probably something else on there. So, it was like that, you know?
Todd L. Burns
Why did you decide to put those things on the label? Why was it important to say, “Gosh, this is a worldwide thing”? Were you even thinking in that context?
Richie Hawtin 
It wasn’t like we were just sitting by ourselves in Canada, we had our eyes
out on the whole international circuit. Derrick and those guys were going back
and forth. You know, there was this massive explosion in 1988, 1989 at the
Summer of Love in the UK. You know, Germany had this whole crazy techno scene
going, so we felt that we wanted to be part of that. And we wanted to be an
international label. Maybe it was just because we didn’t know enough people
around, but I think it comes back to that point, we were… John is also an import into
Canada. He’s Italian, I was British, I had just moved to Canada not so long before so we weren’t really from there, we just felt part of a bigger picture. And we, of course, wanted to project that too.
Todd L. Burns
You were also throwing parties at a certain point, yourself, throughout Detroit and Canada, in Windsor. When did it change from, “I’m playing in a club,” to, “I want to do my own thing and sort of control the environment”?
Richie Hawtin 
There was a change in American radio policy, I think, in the very early ‘90s, where the programming was quite decentralized. And so in Detroit, in Chicago and New York you had really cool radio stations, but suddenly they were being bought up by multi-conglomerates and then the programming was done kind of
nationally. And as that happened, hip-hop came in and suddenly took over the airwaves and that kind of destroyed part of the momentum of the scene in Detroit at that point. Because, even though I’m saying it was still underground, there was still a lot of radio access to cool electronic music
back then. Even on the weekdays around noon, there was this guy playing a
house mix for half an hour called the Midday Cuisine Mix. So when people had
their lunch break, they would turn on house music. It was really, really cool.
But suddenly, all these things changed. The clubs then wanted to have formats
that was on the radio and so again, more hip-hop came in, techno was pushed
out, and suddenly most of us were out of jobs. Derrick and Kevin and some of the
guys who were well-known, and people who could go overseas, went overseas
more. So we were left a little bit with a void.
Todd L. Burns
So the locals didn’t really have as many places to play on a regular basis?
Richie Hawtin 
Exactly. So it was like, “Well, do we give up? Or do we start programming our
own parties?” The backend of a terrible history in Detroit is that there was
tons of vacant land and buildings. And so we were able to appropriate these
places for nothing or really cheap and load a soundsystem in, and start doing parties. And that all started to happen, I think, Plus 8 and myself we were starting to find our specific sound. So we were finding a sound, we’re starting to throw parties. That sound and this certain environment started to
kind of attract a certain type of person. And that whole resurgence of, say, underground electronic music in America started to happen.
Todd L. Burns
What type of person was going to a Plus 8 party back then? Or can you say what
type of sound you were playing, if that’s an easier question?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, what’s great about Detroit and the Midwest is that whole area has always
been very open to an alternative type of sound, you know? You also had Wax Trax and the industrial sound in Chicago. You know, Toronto which wasn’t so
far from us. Montreal… So we’re in a really sweet spot in the Midwest. So
we’re attracting people from all over, you know? Whether it was 500 people, or
later a 1000 or 2000, you would have 50% from the greater Detroit area,
and then people driving 10, 12 hours to the parties. The sound was, at that point, very, very techno. Faster than it is now, but… Intense. I never thought what
we were doing was really aggressive, but it was very intense, you know? You had
massive sound, you had a dark warehouse, you had one strobe light, and you had
like this pummeling. It’s like, the first track you heard, “Spastik,” was made
for those soundsystems. That was what it was like, that was supposed to be
kind of the peak of the night. You know, that peak kind of went for 8, 9 hours, you know?
Todd L. Burns
There was a particular soundsystem basically known as “The System” in your life. Can you talk about that?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, that was a big sloppy Cerwin-Vega system. If you put some of the music that’s made today on it, it probably wouldn’t sound very good ‘cause it wasn’t very pristine. But
“Spastik” was made for it. It had these killer low bottom ends, these scooped
wedges that we would do these four-corner setups, and…
Todd L. Burns
The four-corner setup was quite a new mentality, right?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, you went to clubs and they had these light, little speakers up there.
Like, club systems today where you have, you know, like Output or most of the
clubs here with Funktion One [soundsystems], man, these systems are f—ing killer. But
clubs didn’t have that then, they were made for like ‘80s pop records, you
know? So it was up to us to put a system in there that gave respect to the
records we were playing. And we not only wanted it to have presence and to
feel massive, we wanted it to look massive. We wanted to have these giants
that were kind of ominous on each corner of the dancefloor, you know? With
maybe lighting behind so it would nearly be like… Yeah, giants, or somehow alive, kind
of encapsulating you, holding you onto the middle of the dancefloor. So, we
spent a lot of time on that. There was very little… Actually, there was, in a way, a lot of decoration, but our decoration was made to take away all the senses from the
people who were participating. We wanted people to walk into these locations,
these warehouses and not be able to recognize where they were. Especially, if
there was another party there a couple of weeks later or whatever. So we would
cover everything in black plastic, you know? And so you’d walk in, you’d
really be hard to figure out which was up, left, up and down. Then you’d see a
shadow of this huge speaker and then you would be vibrating from the bass.
Later I did, I guess, kind of a follow-up to “Spastik” and that was called
“Sickness” because at one of the parties when I played “Spastik,” when the
kick came in, some people were actually like “Bluh” [mimes throwing up] in the back of the room, which we found out later when we were cleaning up. That’s cool, that warranted
its own track. But that kind of situation was like, “Man, OK, we hit it tonight.”
Todd L. Burns
And you are continuing to do this sort of thing, the kind of taking over a
space and making it feel like it isn’t normally, and the night that you do in
Ibiza, you were talking about it earlier, doing things to make this place that
you go to feel different. Why is that important?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, we saw the power of and felt the power of what we did in Detroit. I
could play my best sets there and I could take people deeper into where I
wanted to take them and we could control the whole environment. I think that
also goes back down to starting your own record company. You know then, it
wasn’t just about the music. I was doing all the graphic design. I was one
half of the day in the studio learning 909s, and the other half of the day
learning Corel Draw [software] on the computer, so that we could make sure that when someone went to the record store they’re like, “Wow, that looks like a cool
record.” And then, when they put the needle down they’re like, “Man, that
sound is what I was expecting.” So that went on to controlling the parties
that we’re doing to present the music in the best way and that still is very
important to me today, you know? Music has always been the underlining
foundation of all the things I’ve been about, but when you’re trying to create
experience for somebody, it goes way beyond just one sense. And that
challenges me as an artist and gives me more potential to take people on a
deeper experience.
Todd L. Burns
Is it all so-sometimes constraining, though once you have an aesthetic, and you
push it, and then you become known for it, and then perhaps it becomes a
stereotype or a cliché, for some people?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, I guess that happens to people, maybe it’s happened to me. I think that one of
the problems is to keep one-upping yourself and giving people new experiences.
Sometimes it’s like, “Oh, it would be great to just show up and play some
music and not worry about the whole infrastructure of the building.” So I
painted myself a little bit into that corner, but that comes from the time
when you couldn’t just show up at a club and put a great record on because
probably it sounded like shit and the lights looked like garbage. And
actually, soundsystems are much better now, but still, if I don’t look after
how I’m going to be presented at a festival, who knows what lighting they’re
going to put behind me? Who knows what visuals they’re going to put behind me?
I really don’t want to take a chance at that. Out of respect to the music I’m
trying to create, or the experience I’m trying to create by the music I play
from other people, there’s a bigger thing happening.
Todd L. Burns
For some of the young artists out here, how do you navigate sort of controlling
the environment but not getting club owners or other people angry at you for
being some sort of diva?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, I’m sure some people say I’m a diva, but I’m very hands-on. I think, a
diva is someone who probably says, “We need this before I show up,” and then
doesn’t show up until they play. I’m usually down there hanging the plastic.
Maybe not as much as I used to but I see the whole thing, what’s happening on
stage or at a club, as part of a greater thing, so you have to be aware of all
these different points. Club owners, festival owners don’t always appreciate
it, but I’m quite sure that, if we deliver what we’re able to deliver, we can
make the experience better than what that club owner or that festival person
had in their mind.
Todd L. Burns
And I’m sure, once you have success you can point to it and say, “This is what
we’ve done here.”
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, but it’s still a struggle. Like, club owners and festival owners are
usually only mostly considering the bottom line. Like, we’re doing this
13-week residency in Space in Ibiza, and it’s a constant struggle last year and
this year to get the budgets that we want to be able to turn this [gesturing] into a sake bar, turn that thing into a cave; turn this into something else, and do that
for just one night a week for 13 weeks and then go back to the promoter this
year and say, “Well, we’re going to do this totally different.” “Well, can’t you
just use what you used last year?” “Well, no, we’ve already done that.” So,
you have to try to slowly find people who understand or respect or believe in
your vision and want to be part of it. My, I think, steady momentum and climb
over the last 20 years has been by having continuity in my ideas, sustaining
interesting ideas, and slowly finding the right people to continue those
ideas. It’s hard to find the right people.
Todd L. Burns
Telling the story of what you’ve been doing, where you’ve been in the past, is something it seems that you’re very passionate about. Especially now with the CNTRL tour you’ve done recently. It’s called CNTRL: Beyond EDM, right?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, yeah.
Todd L. Burns
Basically, you went around, lecturing and playing a gig at night. The lecture
was taking the form of sort of bringing together people and showcasing
production stuff?
Richie Hawtin 
It was talking about production and history. You know, the basic idea of that,
was that, and why we called the first version “Beyond EDM,” is that there’s so much hype
on this new form of electronic music, but there’s not so much depth. And I
think it’s easy for our whole industry to get swooped under this EDM brand and
suddenly it’s like some kid onstage playing the same songs every night in
order and maybe not even hardly touching the equipment, so we wanted to bring
depth, the story, the history and some integrity back into electronic music.
Todd L. Burns
And you’ve also been very interested in doing interviews and talks with people
like Deadmau5 and Skrillex. Why is that something that you think is even worth
doing? A lot of artists would say, “I don’t even want to be associated with something like that.”
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, well, I think there’s a lot of really bad electronic [air quotes] EDM artists out
there, but I wouldn’t say Skrillex or Deadmau5 are two of those.
Todd L. Burns
Neither would I, but obviously, there’s a perception there sometimes.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, well, you know… [laughs] There’s a greater world happening here.
Electronic music sounds like it’s a huge thing now, but we’ve been slowly
building that for the last – not just me and my gang, but a whole lot of
people all over the world – for 25 years, and you never know which way it’s
going to go, so bringing people and having conversations with Deadmau5, with
Sonny [Skrillex], and showing the different facets of it, and how extreme different
directions it can go in is, I think, valuable and important, just to again
show the depth of history and also how far it’s come. You know, to see Sonny
on stage with one laptop destroying 25,000 people, or whatever, we wouldn’t, I don’t even know if we would have even dreamed about that when I was listening to a
Derrick May set with 200 people in Detroit 20 years ago. So that fascinates me
and also to see why they’re doing things their way. There’s no real right or
wrong way to make or play electronic music as long as you’re doing something
creative. I hear of one or two of the other new big DJs who are like, “Someone
showed me I just kinda play a song, crossfade, play another song.” To me,
that really isn’t very creative; that’s just a selector. But I’m interested in people
who are very deeply connected with these technological tools and kind of
pushing their creativity through those.
Todd L. Burns
The interesting problem that, I think, you’ve faced in the past, and you’ve
acrtually done a really great job of succeeding with this, is actually
finding a way to showcase what you’re doing onstage, like something’s actually
happening in that performative aspect. And it’s hard to figure out a way to
get audiences, if they want, to know what’s going on and that there is a lot of
things that you’re doing up there rather than just doing the crossfader.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, I think everybody wants to look up on stage and see someone doing
something. If they see someone who they think is just checking their email or
just someone there without any computer playing a CD or playing a record,
turning around, talking to his friend, having a smoke and then playing another
record, that’s not very engaging. That’s downright boring. Even if the music
is incredible, after a while you’re like, “Excite me, challenge me.” And so
that’s the kind of the people I’m interested in seeing, and I want to find a
way to connect to the people in front of me, to the audience. Maybe it goes
back to the early days when people said, “Man, Rich what are you doing with
this electronic music? This DJing garbage, that’s not real music, you’re not a
real musician.” So the guy with a guitar is a real musician, more than me? I’ve done my 10,000 hours. That guy can’t go and touch and do what I do. So I guess that drives me too, I want any kid to be able to use technology, to be creative, and be seen as a true artist. It’s not the tool, it’s like what your
intention is, and if you’re actually channeling something from deep within
you, through that apparatus and coming up with something unique at the end.
And that’s the people I wanna talk to or who I wanna support on my label, and
why I would sit down and shoot the sh— with DeadMau5 or whoever.
Todd L. Burns
Talk about the Plastikman Live show because I think that’s probably the most large-scale show that you’ve ever done and showing people that you’re doing stuff.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, well, I was kind of showing people that I was doing stuff, but I was actually, this
Plastikman show, it was a large-scale thing which was a circular, well, half a circle LED screen. I was actually behind it, so no one could actually see me. But all the
visuals you were seeing were actually synchronized and generated by what I was
doing on my computers, and sometimes we would actually show images on the
screen and show people cameras and what I was doing. And it’s also playing
with that; in the heart of me I love getting into this because I was the
introverted nerd who didn’t want to get on stage, that I could be in the
basement of my parent’s house with this equipment and make stuff by myself.
Playing with that in front of an audience, giving them some information,
taking it back, it’s also kind of fun with that. There has to be some kind of
like, what is it, wizardry when you’re watching an artist play. I don’t
exactly know. But if it’s all smoke and mirrors and you can’t grab on to
anything, well, then maybe that kid watching isn’t going to delve in deeper
and may go off into something else. So that’s why I try to be engaged at quite
a lot of points in my career right now. And also, for me my biggest push is to
have full transparency to what I’m doing. We developed this software called
Twitter DJ, which is a little program that runs in the background of my
computer. When I’m playing Traktor, every time I play a record it actually
posts it to my Twitter site, so that people can actually be on the dancefloor
and see what I’m playing. And I would like to have even more transparency in
the future, and say, “Hey, this is what I’m doing. Come on, check it out!”
Todd L. Burns
Did that change from an earlier time when you were a little bit more secretive
about what you were doing or was that always kind of the goal?
Richie Hawtin 
I think there was a time when everybody was more secretive, because the records… Actually, it makes no sense, right? ‘Cause at that time nobody could get the records, so tell everybody, you’re not gonna get it anyway. Now everybody can get it and I tell
everybody. But I was shy back then, if people were standing in front of me, I
had a hood up. It was really difficult to play. But I think why I’m doing this
is that I really feel there’s some incredible artist out there using CDs or
computers and doing incredible things and there’s still a greater world out
there, that looks at our world and says, “Huh, just a bunch of dumb DJs.” They
don’t take us seriously. They don’t feel that there’s any depth, there’s
no integrity. And so, when I see something like EDM blowing up and seeing
artists with no depth getting promotion and getting notoriety, then it’s
important for people who are doing something interesting and creative to step
up and say, “OK, there’s more than meets the eye to this EDM brand.”
Todd L. Burns
Why do you feel so compelled to, kind of, it’s not defending it, but at least
explaining it, being out there in front? I mean, there’s a lot of artists who
aren’t that compelled or interested in trying to raise the flag or something.
Richie Hawtin 
Again, I was a kid sitting in front of the computer by myself and I found a
way that that device could tap into my creativity. I never thought I was going
to be a musician. I thought maybe I’d be a programmer or something but that
innovation of technology allowed me to do something that was really beyond my
wildest dreams. And I want every kid to have that experience and have that
option of not having to become whatever, an accountant or the normal things
that parents perhaps want you to be. To see this as perhaps a viable career or
at least something to like spend a lot of time in and have fun.
Todd L. Burns
Let’s talk about New York. I mean, this interview is 12 years in the making,
basically. The last time, you were supposed to be part of the 2001 Red Bull
Music Academy, and
that was happening during September, and something happened in September, but
you were also living here around that time as well.
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, I was here on September 11th, waiting to do the Academy. I wasn’t living
here then. About two years later I came to New York at what seemed to be a
pivotal time. There was a lot of interesting events happening in Manhattan,
and especially Brooklyn in the early Williamsburg days. So that was, um…
Todd L. Burns
What were some of those events that were happening that were so inspiring?
Richie Hawtin 
Man, just weird warehouse parties and crazy loft parties on Wythe [Street].
[laughs] So it was shortly before I left North America to go live in Berlin.
But after September 11th, there was like an initial thing where there seemed
to be a lot of, like, people were ready for something new. But at the same time there
was this change in freedoms of what you were able to actually do. And that’s
what ended up pushing many of us, I think, over to Europe where we felt more
connected to the scene and where there was more freedom to kind of express
ourselves as electronic musicians, and to explore where we were going.
Todd L. Burns
And you’re living in Berlin still?
Richie Hawtin 
I don’t really live anywhere. You know, I have my house in Canada and I have
an apartment in Berlin. But I’m traveling so much. Someone said to me, “What
do you do after DJing?” It was like, “Well, I don’t know what I’m going to
do. But I’d like to find something to do that I can make enough money that I
can still travel around the globe, meeting cool people and visiting places
I’ve never been,” because I love that part of it also. Like, just meeting
people who are excited by the possibilities of technology and creativity and
music, and all these… It’s never a dull moment.
Todd L. Burns
What technology is exciting you at the moment?
Richie Hawtin 
Hmm. You know, touch technology and iPads and all this was kind of getting me
for a while. But right now, coming back to this transparency point, I’m very
interested how wireless technology, Internet technology can really bridge the
gap between me and the audience, that can give further information, further
insight to the creative moment. You know, like when we listened to “Spastik”
earlier, that was a moment that I contained on a 2-track reel-to-,reel and we
can play it back, but there’s very little data to that. I can’t even really
tell you exactly what equipment I used or what effect settings there was… Which is nice, I like that. But when that creative moment happens, especially
for me on stage, I would love to have people being able to visualize that and
perhaps that will inspire them to do something with that.
Todd L. Burns
Why don’t we play another tune? This is from an album called Closer, it’s “Disconnect.”
(music: Plastikman – “Disconnect”)
Richie Hawtin 
One of my happier tunes.
[laughter / applause]
Todd L. Burns
How do you get into the frame of mind where you are writing music like this? This is also a vocal tune, which is…
Richie Hawtin 
Usually, when I’m recording, I try to get sucked into a certain frame of mind.
We were talking here earlier, how sometimes you find the equipment you want to
use and then you spend months with just that equipment until kind of an
epiphany hits and everything comes together. I was trying to write this album,
and I’d never done vocals before, and I was just making stuff that sounded
like my previous albums. And then, for some reason, I started writing, and for
about three months I was writing lyrics, I guess, and then everything clicked
together. And once the recording process was done, which was like 2005, I
didn’t think in lyrics anymore. It was really strange. It was really like my
brain clicked and I couldn’t stop writing, and then one moment I couldn’t
write for the life of me. So that’s what wanted or needed to come out on that
album. With all the Plastikman albums there’s always a very… You know, the
foundation is a 303, so there’s always a kind of exploration of, “Can I take
that TB-303 into a new area?” So you have something like the early Plastikman
albums, Sheet One, Musik, which are very acidic. And then you have the
Consumed area, which is more about architecture and space and about the echos of the 303s. And on this one you kind of get nearly like you’re sucked into the middle of
that machine and you are hearing it talk. So yeah, that’s why there are big
gaps between all of my Plastikman albums. It’s not something that…
Todd L. Burns
It’s not a head space you want to live all the time.
Richie Hawtin 
I don’t want to live this album all the time, you know, but I’m glad I lived
it. And I’m glad each album really has its certain sound and that when I
really feel there’s something to say with Plastikman and that project, I’ll
record. So, it usually is four or five or six years in between. And then it’s an
adventure for me and hopefully an adventure for the listener.
Todd L. Burns
Judging by my calculations, we’re overdue.
Richie Hawtin 
[laughs] I’m definitely overdue. But I remember early on, after the second album,
Musik, that came out in ’95, there was a big push or decision for me at that
moment. It was like, “OK, do I make Plastikman my project and do I keep pumping
out albums?” But I was like, “I don’t feel like doing another Plastikman album
right now. Now I feel like at that point doing this experimental
Concept series.” Then after that,
I spent so much time in the studio by myself that I was like, “Fu—, I really
want to get on stage and just DJ again.” And then I went on stage and I took
some of the instruments that I used on the album, the 909 drum machine and my
DP/4 effects processor, put it next to my turntables and then Decks, EFX
& 909 was born. So these all, in my head, just have continuity, they all
kind of organically happened. And the way I DJ now was something that I was
really experimenting in late ‘90s and early 2000s with the DE9: Closer to the
Edit album and especially DE9: Transitions, those albums were produced, they’re not live, but they kind of were the prototype of what I try do when I’m in front of you guys now.
Todd L. Burns
With the different aliases was there any mention that this was an idea that
you could continue to pump out Plastikman albums. Was there any worry that,
“All this momentum that I have built up with Plastikman, if I just stop doing
it that it’s going to be a problem for bookings or whatever”?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, with Plastikman I was working with Mute Records and had some partners
with that project, and definitely some people were like, “Well, maybe you
should just focus your attention on one thing.” But I think there’s like a
Hawtin momentum, and under Hawtin there’s DJing and making records under
Plastikman, and there’s this Ibiza thing, and there’s all these other dumb
things I’m involved in but it’s what I like. If I like doing something, then
I’ll spend hours researching or practicing – well I don’t really practice DJing, but I spend a lot of time on it – and usually I
end up being pretty good at it, because I’ll just keep doing it if I love it, you
know?
Todd L. Burns
What are the other dumb things that you’re involved in?
Richie Hawtin 
Well, I don’t know. [laughs] I’m trying to think of what I’m involved in right now. I don’t know. [laughs]
Todd L. Burns
Why don’t we open up to questions from the audience? Does anyone have a question for Rich? Just wait for a microphone if you don’t mind.
Audience Member 
I was curious to know if there are any territories that you’re interested in
exploring in your musical universe?
Richie Hawtin 
I guess I would like to explore a little bit more in vocalization, but not
necessarily with me, like with a partner, and explore where that goes. Even
with what you’ve heard today a lot of the music that I do is, of course,
confined by rhythm and beats, because that’s what I’m good at, that’s what the
people grab onto. So using perhaps voice would allow me to worry more about
the atmosphere, and maybe go further into another area.
Todd L. Burns
Are there any other…?
Richie Hawtin 
But just back to your [question], like where we were talking about other
projects I’m in. I’ve always had a low attention span. I try to get involved
somehow with everything that has kind of ties to music or technology. But for
me, working on an album is a huge creative output, but right now working on
the ENTER shows, the residency that we’re doing in Ibiza. You know, I’ve got 13 weeks to program four rooms musically, so I have to do all this research, who works in
this room, who should play after each other. “OK, these guys are playing
really deep and dark, how should that room look and feel?” So this is just
another facet of delving into my mind and my creativity and trying to project
it in an overall experience. That’s what, you know, when I did Sheet One, the first Plastikman
album, the one thing that I remember, going to that studio, was like, “I’m
going in to record an album.” At that point in electronic music history it was
all about compilations. You know, you put out as many 12”s as possible, then
you made an album, but all the album was, was all the A-sides from your
singles. It wasn’t actually thought out as an album, it was more of a
marketing thing. And that was to me so boring. I used to listen to Tangerine Dream
or Kraftwerk and these were like, “Fu—, you can’t take “The Model” – well,
you can take “The Model” out – but like Trans Europe Express, you can take
those songs apart and they’re great, but if you listen to that whole thing, it
goes to another level. So an album is like that to me, a project, a Plastikman
live show, which is this immersive environment for the people. All these are,
in a way, like multidisciplinary projects that keep me interested and engaged
and excited and inspired.
Todd L. Burns
Did you have a question?
Audience Member 
Yeah, so you were saying that earlier in your career you were doing shows that
were just quite “dark room and strobe light,” but now, when you go to one of
your gigs it might be there’s a lot of technology and a lot of audio visual
stuff going on. What’s the difference now and why do you think that this is
better than as opposed to just sort of boiling it down to the music?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, I think it’s also the context I’m playing in. Like, it’s very hard to
turn, say, a stage at EDC into a black room, especially when you’re playing in
the day. So we’re trying to then tie different things together and present
something in that framework. So then we start thinking about, “OK, well, we
have lights to work with, we have LEDs to work with or projection, so can we
do something that ties together with the music, which heightens the
experience?” If I go to a club, sometimes I wanna see something, so I watch
the show, but I can also have a very insular experience and go in front of the
speakers and close my eyes and just lose myself. So I think that’s still
there, but you’ve also seen the growth of electronic music has been that it’s
also taken a step away from it only being an insular experience. It is now a
kind of a group experience, you do have those lights, flashing lights and
crazy animations. But for me it’s important that, if we’re gonna have all
those components that they do make sense, and they’re cohesive. That was the
big thing about Plastikman Live. For me, right now there’s a big problem in
electronic dance music that everybody is trying to upstage each other and put
as much flashing lights and animation in front of everybody. And most of it
doesn’t make sense, and most of it’s garbage. So we try to bring something
that was very cohesive, that you were watching something, if you kind of close
your ears and you couldn’t hear the sound, you could nearly hear it by
watching it. And if you closed your eyes and opened up your ears again you
could nearly see it by listening to it. So that’s how we try to present
something like that.
Todd L. Burns
Yeah, one of the things I was struck by when I saw the Plastikman Live show wasn’t
the most enormous thing, but everything held together very, very well, and that
there’s a lot of people working to make that happen.
Richie Hawtin 
There’s a lot of people to make that kinda show happen and it’s sometimes much
harder to make a reduced show like that than all these flashing lights. It’s
very easy to order a thousand lamps and a couple of lasers and kind of flash
everybody to death. But to actually have some depth and that people are still
standing in front of you an hour later be like, “Fu—, there’s something more
here.” That takes time, energy, design, creativity from, I guess starting with
my ideas musically and then going through some of my team members and friends
that we work with and creating something bigger than all of us. And also, back
to the kind of the black-room thing. Actually, we have something like that in
Detroit next week. We’re doing a Jack party, which is kind of back to those
black-room things. It’s not just a strobe light, there is some lighting, but
it has that kind of ethos involved in what we’re trying to do. So you can go
back to, how do you revisit something and update it with the technology that’s
available or just with your ideas because just going back and coating a room
in black plastic and having a strobe light, you know, it’s then are you gonna
ask me to play records too? It’s like, I did that, you know, it was great, but
it doesn’t really turn me on so much now.
Audience Member 
I know now you use Maschine as your drum machine, and now because of the question of going back, would you go and play with a 909 or 303 instead of having the Maschine?
Richie Hawtin 
Not really. Jeff Mills is really good at using the 909, he can dial in that
thing right on-beat. I was a bit more sloppy. [laughs] So you end up kinda
pounding it a bit more, at least when I use that. And with the soundsystems
today too, playing digital files, overlaying them with digital drums from
Native Instruments, a Maschine, or something, it all kind of, again, is
cohesive, makes sense together. So, it’s just one of the challenges, not only
on stage, but also in the studio; laying old world analog and new
world digital together. So, it’s much easier to sit there in the studio and
have time to find that perfect thing, but on a live setting it’s a little bit
more difficult, that’s why I choose to use Maschine. And with Maschine I can
also tie that to my beats, my tempos, all my records, because as I’ve said
before, I don’t really care about beat matching. I’m pushing and pulling some
of the rhythms and some of the tempos, or the things I’m playing, but some of
that stuff needs to be automated because I need to focus my attention on the
other things I’m doing. The delays, the reverbs, the EQing, and to give
attention to this wall of sound that I’m trying to create when I DJ.
Audience Member 
And one more question, why is it called “Jack”?
Audience Member 
The party.
Richie Hawtin 
Why is it called Jack? Well, we did Jack parties back in the day. Really, it’s a hark back to the early Jack parties we did in ’94, ’95, ’96 in Detroit, which were these stripped down, black box, The System was there. This massive system, so it’s a Jack party. It’s in 2013. The System isn’t there, because The System actually, what we think it sounded like back then, you know, it’s a
myth. It sounded great to our ears then, but it wouldn’t sound good to us
today. So, now we’ve got new technology to create a system that sounds like
what we think it should have. We’ve got an update of strobe lights, which is
actually older technology lighting that we’re but to get this kind of
disorientating, black-box feeling to the music that I’m playing. You know,
most of those parties also, part of the beauty of using simplistic lighting
design was that, many times, those on and off switches or a couple of faders
were in front of my DJ equipment, and so I would be turning things on and off.
You know, ‘cause I hate when someone hits a strobe light, you know? Luckily,
my sound guy, Matias, he’s incredibl[e] for timing, and we’ve been traveling
together for four or five years now, so he knows my timing, how I’m playing.
But it sucks when those lights aren’t working at the right time. And so those
early days of doing that myself were actually kind of me experimenting with
what became Plastikman, 15 or 20 years later, with me controlling everything
from the computer on stage.
TODD L. BURNS 
Are there any other questions?
Audience Member 
I know it’s hard to predict the future, but do you think about going back to
the studio and stop touring for a while, and I don’t know, and put out a new
record or something?
Richie Hawtin 
Yeah, I would be as happy as a lot of my fans. I would love to go into the
studio. We were talking earlier about this. Usually, I book time off every
year. But what happens is that the momentum of… You say when the studio is
all running, it’s humming. All the machines are going. You just need to walk
in and take your idea and put it through there. But what happens to me the
last few number of years is that I leave the studio, I come back six months
later, after being on tour, and by the time I get everything humming again,
it’s time to leave. So, I’m in a process right now, trying to find a very
small collection of instruments that I like and use those and play with them
more throughout my season. Having a little studio in Ibiza, so that when I do
have my time off in October, November, December, January, which is a huge
chunk that I have coming up, that I can kind of jump into the studio and maybe
not start creating the first day, but at least feel like I’m not restarting
everything. You know, sometimes that last couple of years it’s really been
like eight months, or ten months and you go back in and it’s like cobwebs in my
studio nearly. [laughs] So, that’s not the most inspiring thing to get you
on the creative pathway. It’s hard though. I love traveling, I love playing
new places, and cool new records coming out, and a new piece of equipment, I’m
doing something new on stage and I’m also trying to also represent electronic
music. We’re doing CNTRL, we’re doing these type of things. In the early days,
I didn’t wanna do any of this stuff. I just wanted to be away from all you
people, [laughter] by myself, in my studio. I was so happy there, but I am happy doing
all these other stuff too.
Audience Member 
Obviously, Ibiza’s an important place to you. You’ve played there a long time
and now you’re doing ENTER for the second season. Is this something that you
would see being able to do anywhere else? And kinda to that point, there’s
been a lot of attention placed in America right now with EDM and everything
like that, do you think there’s something special about America in its own
place in, like, the musical spectrum that needs to be given more attention?
Richie Hawtin 
You know, I think America has a huge potential there. You got Ibiza, which is
this epicenter. You got Vegas here. You know, Vegas, there’s so much money
there, and so many people getting thrown money just to play some records and
actually do pretty much nothing very creative or interesting. But you also
have companies there like Cirque du Soleil doing these crazy things. We would
love to end up doing something there, where we can get a cool budget to do
something really immersive and challenging and inspiring, for us and for the
people who could come. So, right now we’re doing our [air quotes] ENTER stages at EDC and
some other places. You know, as this tide of electronic music builds over
here, we only hope that that’s gonna offer more potential to do more just club
gigs, and more partnerships with people to do interesting cool events.
Todd L. Burns
Any other questions?
Audience Member 
Obviously, you’ve had a long career by now and there’s been many ups and downs
in electronic music, especially in the States, but all over the world, I feel
like. Was there ever a point where you felt lost and you wanted to quit? And
what kind of things do you do when you feel uninspired or just not into it?
Richie Hawtin 
I never felt, like… I definitely felt lost at points, I never felt like I wanted to quit. I think one of the hardest moments for me was in ’95, ’96, after the second Plastikman album, and everybody was like, yeah, “Plastikman,” everyone was talking about me. I would start to get a little taste of people recognizing me and it was just
like, “Wow, what is this all about?” You know, “Why do I have to do another
Plastikman album now? And that means I just have to plug in the 303 and it’s
always gonna sound like…?” It was really uninspiring. Actually, in
retrospect at that point, I had some problems with the US, like, I wasn’t able
to come into the country. And so it pushed me to reevaluate where I was, so I
went into the studio, I turned all my 303s off, I decided I would only use
three pieces of equipment, and I was gonna release a record every month for
one year. Which, you know, lost some of my fans, but it gave me a time to
experiment and find my realignment. I guess, another point like in ’98, after
running Plus 8 Records for eight years with John Acquaviva, it became this
huge company and we sat down at one point and I was like, “You having fun?” And he was like, “No, this sucks.” You know, we’re businessmen. So we basically kinda closed Plus 8. We took it back off ice later, but it’s like that hobby that’s turn into a career. And what I said about doing so many
different projects all over the place, my hairbrain project is my love of
Japanese sake probably right now, which is a small industry which is very much
like the independent record industry. I see all these parallels so that I put
part of my energy over there. That inspires me, reenergizes me, which goes
back into spending hours with a new piece of equipment and it just kinda
continues. So I guess the point is, yeah, you get lost. No, I never felt like
giving up, I just like, “OK, I’m not having fun. What do I do to have fun
again?” Leave from New York? Go to Berlin? Spend a couple of crazy summers on
Ibiza with Sven Väth and the Cocoon posse? That was fun. That reenergized me.
[laughter]
I was also lost a little bit, but it was really f—ing fun.
Audience Member 
I believe there are some videos on the Internet.
Richie Hawtin 
So it’s a whole lifestyle. This is what I do. I’m really lucky to be
surrounded by really cool, inspired friends and individuals and meeting always
new people. I have a lot of energy, so it’s cool.
Todd L. Burns
Any other questions?
Audience Member 
You have spoken a couple of times, even today, about how earlier in your
career you were a lot more introverted, both in terms of being outgoing
towards the audience and being a lot more focused in the studio, and over the
last 10/15 years you’ve become a lot more extroverted. Can you maybe speak a
little bit about how that change has taken place? Whether there was something
in particular that happened and you said, “I want to go from this way to
be more conscious about being this other way,” or whether it was a more
natural transition?
Richie Hawtin 
I think it was more natural. Like, I remember seeing at points, you know, Sven
Väth is a good example. I spent a lot of time with him. He’s an incredible
showman. He does a lot of crazy sh— onstage to engage with an audience. And
so many other electronic people do that right now. So, “I can see he’s getting
a reaction, he’s feeling connected, but maybe that’s too much. What can I do to connect to the fans in
front of me that still ties to the music?” For a while I was stage diving but
then I was like, “Maybe that’s not for me.” [laughter] Especially when I fell off and
I really hurt myself. “OK, definitely not.” But this is an exploration. I
didn’t think I was going to be some creative musician-DJ type, and so I’ve
kind of started and got more used to making records in the studio, then
playing them out because people wanted to hear them and were inviting me. And you just sort of grow into that role. And getting more confidence. That’s honestly why I’m trying to do more transparency right now. I want people to know all the tracks I’m playing. I
want everybody to have all the music I play. I want everybody to try to play
like me, because it’s not really important in the end about what I’m doing,
the music or the equipment. It’s me, and I guess I’ve found a confidence level
where I’ve tapped into me, you know? That’s what’s unique. All these artists,
it’s about the human. And that’s what I want to explore and that’s what I want
to promote by what we’re talking about and the technologies I’m developing.
Yeah, man and machine. Or woman and machine. That’s an incredible adventure
for all of us to go on.
Todd L. Burns
Well, I think that’s a good stopping place. You’ll be around for a little bit
if anyone has any specific questions, but for now thank you very much, Richie
Hawtin.
Richie Hawtin 
Thank you.
[applause]
