Todd Edwards is well known for his hypnotic collage of cut-up samples over swing house beats and extremely juicy, disco-flavored bass lines. Credited as one of the godfathers of UK garage, his four-to-the-floor beats have won him a passionate fan base in Europe. Todd’s trademark sound on his early releases on NYC house labels like i! Records and Nervous quickly cemented his status in underground dance music circles across the pond, in the time before London’s 2-step sound had morphed into grime. Over the years, Edwards has remixed Moloko, Justice, Phoenix, St. Germain, Klaxons, and even Boris, among numerous others, and he co-produced and sang on Daft Punk’s “Face To Face,” from their milestone 2001 album Discovery.
In his 2013 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, Edwards discussed the differences between house and garage, micro-sampling, spirituality and more.
EMMA WARREN 
Welcome. Lots of people who sit on this couch can say they’ve influenced
something or someone, but there aren’t many people who can say they’ve
basically kick-started a whole genre. We’re gonna be talking about all sorts
of things, early New York and most recent stuff, but first off, I think we
should just give a very, very big, warm welcome to Todd Edwards.
[applause]
Todd Edwards 
Thank you.
EMMA WARREN 
So, like I said, we are gonna go back and talk about the sort of halcyon days
of New York house and garage, but the first thing I wanted to ask you was
you’ve kind of just come back from some little mini-tours in the UK and
Austria, and you’ve just come back from Mexico. And I wondered whether it felt
like your sound has been rediscovered again by the whole world.
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, it’s kind of interesting. I had taken a two-year hiatus off. Kind of had
a parting-of-ways with the old label I was on, and reached a low in the slash
independent music market, with piracy taking over and killing off a lot of old
labels. It was funny, when I came back I decided after two years of working a
regular job and wanting to jump off a bridge, I decided that I wanted to dive
in full-time. And at the height of the American recession, I just decided to
quit the job and to take a chance and go back in full-time again. And it was
at that point I realised, I was blessed that it actually happened at that
time. I was getting interviewed, and dubstep obviously was really big, and one
of the questions that this interviewer asked me over the phone, he’s like,
“How do you feel that you’re having dubstep producers say that you’re one of
their influences?” I honestly didn’t really even know too much about dubstep
at the time. Like, I heard some of it in, I guess, 2007. I’m like, “This
sounds like Timbaland productions,” you know? And I was, like, “Wow.” It’s
amazing, the timing couldn’t have been more impeccable, because the fact that
I’m being recognised as an influence, I didn’t know that that was the case. So
it was almost like the first introduction back into the scene, and it took
about a year of having a really good manager to really put my face back on the
map of the scene. ’Cause everyone’s always like, “Where did he go? What
happened over those two years?” It’s funny. Don’t take any time off.
[laughs]
EMMA WARREN 
I think, for people who were there at the time, they would have a finely
nuanced idea of the difference between house and garage. But it might not be
quite so obvious. And also, the ideas of those things change over time, don’t
they? They’re different to people who might think about it now, or hear those
records now, than they were at the time. Can you break down for us what those
two things mean to you?
Todd Edwards 
Originally, I was only trying to come up with my own sound. I was very heavily
influenced by Masters At Work, Kenny “Dope”
Gonzalez’s
drum programming. He had these wonderfully shuffly beats, and we can play a
track by him after. So I was, you know, shuffly 16 triplets were very big. And
then you had someone like MK, Marc
Kinchen, who cut up vocals, and I
was highly influenced by that, and basically put those two concepts together.
A lot of people probably already know this, but I also loved Enya, and she
used her vocals as musical elements, so I was like, “Why not if I take sampled
vocals and make those the instruments, instead of organs or pianos and
whatnot?” And I just put this together, so it had a very shuffly sound. I had
an old Ensoniq EPS keyboard, which had about 15 to 30 seconds of sampling time, but the quantise
on there was amazing. It had this great, really hard triplet shuffle, so that
really made this sound what it was. And when it took off, you had kids trying
to imitate that. So, to me, it was just house music with shuffly beats. Maybe
it was just that I made very sloppy-sounding house music, but my roots are in
house music. It just so happens that in England, they started to speed up the
tempo, it started to get the coined phrase “speed garage,” which is not
exactly a positive phrase. People started wanting to disassociate with speed
garage, there was almost like a rift between house music and UK garage at the
time. I would just say the difference is that house music is much smoother
sounding, especially these days, it’s less sample-involved. I think it’s
obvious that most people are using more synths, and there is a move back to
’90s house and organs and pianos and whatnot, but sampling still is not as
dominant as it was at the time in UK garage. Is that clear enough?
EMMA WARREN 
So really, for you, the difference is house is kind of smoother and garage was
more...
Todd Edwards 
Shuffly, and swingy beats and whatnot. And again, a lot more sampling than is
in house music these days.
EMMA WARREN 
And was there a kind of point where you as a music fan could pinpoint where
that shift happened? Like, is it MK, or were there a kind of bunch of people
who made that transition?
Todd Edwards 
You know, I can’t say that I know the exact transition point. Because I
listened to a lot of house music in the early days. From ’90 to around ’93 I
did nothing but listen to house music. And I wasn’t really exposing myself to
Chicago house, or anything that was going on in LA. I was honestly just
listening to what was on the radio in New York at the time. You had people
like Tony Humphries and... Who
else? There was Red Alert, he played hip-hop, but there was a bunch of DJs on the radio at
the time that actually had these house shows at night. Glenn Friscia, you know?
And so I have cassettes, like loads of cassettes that I would just record. I
still have them someplace. Listen to those on campuses, I was going to
college, I barely went to class, I would just walk around with my headphones
on and stuff. Go on.
EMMA WARREN 
I just wondered about, you said you got the cassettes somewhere. Do you
remember the last time that you sort of reached back and listened to them?
Todd Edwards 
Well, funny enough, before I moved to LA, I had to go through these cassettes
to determine what I was keeping or not, so I got a little throwback recently.
EMMA WARREN 
And was there anything that you noticed about them that maybe wasn’t apparent
to you at the time? Or what was the main thing that you saw about them or felt
about them listening to them now?
Todd Edwards 
Aside from the nostalgia, I mean, to me, it could be just that I’m biased
towards that time period, but I just think that between ’90 and ’93 is one of
my favorite generations of house music. I think you had a lot of producers
before – in my personal opinion, before hip-hop really kicked in – you had a
lot of producers that were making house music. So you were getting a really
good sound coming out, very soulful, very raw, very underground. And after
that time period it just seemed like that whole deep underground sound started
to change and get a little bit more progressive and less soulful, to be
honest.
EMMA WARREN 
And sort of seeing, as we’ve kind of found ourselves psycho-geographically in
New York in the early ’90s, could you paint us a picture, give us a bit of
color about what it was like at that time? I mean, I know that you went to the
Shelter and the Sound Factory
Bar.
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, yeah, Sound Factory Bar was amazing. I always tell the same story. At
one of the best nights, it was the night before Thanksgiving, it was right
during the release of Masters At Work dropping “I Can’t Get No
Sleep,” featuring India. And this
was an amazing house track, and there was a part in this song that just had
this transition, and India just has this epic voice, she winded up, like she
goes up and sings this glissando up, and the music changes, and the crowd went
ballistic when they heard it, and the energy in the room was magnetic. And
again, at the time, when I was younger I didn’t really DJ, so to see this
happen in a club was the first landmark occasion, where I got a dose of how an
audience reacts to a good DJ or a good performance.
EMMA WARREN 
But if you – not necessarily literally – close your eyes and see yourself in
that room, and you look around, what do you see?
Todd Edwards 
You mean, as far as the vibe in the room?
EMMA WARREN 
Yeah, just who’s there? What do they look like? What kind of mix of people?
What’s going on?
Todd Edwards 
I mean, it was pretty mellow. It’s looking out into the audience, you had a
good mix of people. I mean, it was white, black, Hispanic, gay, straight. It
was a very open club. The smell of marijuana laced the room. It was good, you
know what I mean? The upstairs section was probably a room not too much bigger
than this, and again, there was always producers that showed up. Like, Todd Terry would show up
and I would always bother the hell out of him and tell him how great he was.
Who else?
EMMA WARREN 
How would he respond to your bothering?
Todd Edwards 
[laughs] He was patient at first, but you could tell I was annoying the hell
out of him after a while. Because I would do... I can’t help it! He was a role
model at the time, you know?
EMMA WARREN 
I’ve just got this funny image now in my head of the kind of ‘Todd Meets
Todd’.
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, exactly.
EMMA WARREN 
It’s Todd squared.
Todd Edwards 
And he was the original ‘Todd the God,’ too, so...
EMMA WARREN 
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Do you think he ever minded that you got the “God” suffix?
Todd Edwards 
I mean, I would hope not. He’s had so many accomplishments, I mean, I’m very
thankful for everything that I’ve accomplished, but he’s hit so many different
genres, had so many pop hits and worked with so many artists, so if it
bothered him, I would think that would be very, kind of, shallow-minded of
him.
EMMA WARREN 
I didn’t really mean it.
Todd Edwards 
I know.
EMMA WARREN 
It was a throw-away thing, really. I mean that’s definitely seen as a real
golden age of a certain type of house music. Did it feel like that at the
time?
Todd Edwards 
I don’t think any time you’re going through something you can really see it
for all it is, until you get a retrospective on it.
EMMA WARREN 
I think sometimes, at the time, though, if you’ve ever been somewhere where
really amazing stuff’s happening, then you recognise it again.
Todd Edwards 
Well, let’s put it this way... Whose phone is going? No, just kidding. For me,
I’m a very picky person when it comes to music, honestly. It’s like, after
three years of listening to house music, I kind of got sick of listening to
house music. Only because the New York scene was using the same chords over
and over again. And it was just like, “OK, I’ve learned everything.” Once you
start really understanding what’s going on, production-wise, you need
something more challenging. And so I started to go back to other genres of
music, but at the time, like I said, I just loved what all the producers were
doing up to about ’94, and then after that sounds started to change. I mean,
everyone goes into a different direction. So I guess, if you want to look at
it that way, if those few years were what I listened to mostly and then I
stopped, yeah, I guess that would be the golden age for me, you know?
EMMA WARREN 
So it seems like what you’re saying is that there was a part of your brain
when you were there, at the Shelter, or listening non-stop to house records,
or taping stuff off the radio that was assimilating what you were hearing,
working out how it was done, and then getting to a point where you were gonna
do stuff yourself.
Todd Edwards 
Yes. Well, I mean that’s the thing. The more years you spend making music, the
more you start to understand it. I don’t know about what you’re producing, but
I would strongly suggest to definitely learn chords, musical chords, on the
piano inside and out. It’s definitely helpful. It’s a double-edged sword,
because you can start to think too much inside the box, but it’s so much
easier once you start understanding how chords are put together, in their
different inversions, and it just makes coming up with the music so much
easier.
EMMA WARREN 
I’ve heard you say that before, actually, that your best bit of advice for
anyone producing electronic music is to start playing the piano. And I know
that you had played a little bit and had been around people that were playing.
I think we should hear some of your music.
Todd Edwards 
Sure, definitely.
EMMA WARREN 
Very shortly. So, would you say that, basically, at this point, when you’re
just primed to start making music yourself, you’re equally informed by family-based musicality as you are by all the house music you’ve been mainlining for
the last four or five years?
Todd Edwards 
Wait, say that one more time?
EMMA WARREN 
That got a bit complex. Sorry.
Todd Edwards 
No, that’s okay. I’m simple-minded.
EMMA WARREN 
I’m just wondering whether or not what you’re saying is that – or whether it’s
true to say that – for you, when you were just about to start making music,
you were just as informed by musicality and playing of music as you were by
all the house music that you’d been absorbing?
Todd Edwards 
When I first was getting out of high school I had taken a year and a half of
piano, so I had a basic understanding that way. I was also exposed to a lot of
disco. My sister is nine years older than me, so I took musical cues from what
she listened to as well, and I listened to a lot of pop music growing up. The
thing about house music was, I initially looked at it as being this simple art
form that was going to be an easy way to break into the music industry. It did
only take a couple years for me, but I was humbled by the fact that it wasn’t
easy as I initially [thought]. Just because some things sound simple doesn’t
mean it’s easy to make. I learned as I listened, but diving in and getting
your hands dirty and really making it, the more music you make, the better you
are. That’s why I think that you could be a great DJ and know what sounds
great; that doesn’t necessarily mean as soon as you sit down at the keyboard,
you’re gonna make an amazing track. It’s its own art form, so you need to just
keep doing it and doing it and you hone your craft and you get better and
better at it.
EMMA WARREN 
So while we just find a track, can you just tell us which disco records you
particularly liked from your sister’s record collection?
Todd Edwards 
I was into a lot of Quincy Jones. But to be honest, I didn’t know, I wasn’t
good with names. Ever. There were summers where the SOS Band, pop disco
stuff... I mean, there was Stevie Wonder on the radio. Who else? Who else?
Quincy Jones, like stuff off The Dude, that I would discover later on. I’m
like, “Oh, that’s Quincy Jones,” and you would realise he’s behind so many
productions. So if it wasn’t for my friend Rich
‘Crease-O’, who I’ve co-produced with, I would have never thought to look at production names. I was
clueless with that. I’m horrible with names.
EMMA WARREN 
OK, so then should we hear not your first release but one of your early
releases?
Todd Edwards 
Sure.
EMMA WARREN 
“Guide My Soul.” And then we’ll hear a bit and you can tell us something about
it.
(music: The Messenger - “Guide My Soul”)
So, what had you figured out how to do by then?
Todd Edwards 
Well, first of all, the earliest label that I was on, or the one that’s worth
recognising, is 111 East
Records. And prior to working on
that label, I didn’t do a lot of sampling, as far as drums were concerned.
James Bratton worked with a
singer named Sybil, and he was good at ripping people off. No, seriously. He
came to England, you remember the track “Pump Up the
Volume,” which was huge in the
mid-’80s? He went over to England and heard this and came back with that
bassline sound. And Sybil had a track called “My Love is
Guaranteed,” and he did a whole
mix with that bassline, and it caused this whole lawsuit. And I heard it on
the radio before I knew him, and when I met him, I was like, “That was you?
Really?” And even when Soul II Soul came up with that drum pattern, ‘[doom
doom zzssit]’. He did another song
called “Don’t Make Me Over,” it
was a re-make, and had Sybil sing it, but like he picked the cues up from
England. And that’s the one thing about not having internet back then, you
know, there was a delay. If someone in England was coming up with something
amazing, and you caught wind of that, you could bring it back to your country
and do your thing with it, so... What was the original question? [laughs]
EMMA WARREN 
The question, really, was: by the time you’re making this, what have you
figured out to do? What’s going on?
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, I had a Yamaha RY30 drum
machine, which had basic sounds and whatnot, but he’s like, “You know, why
don’t you start sampling your drum sounds instead of using this drum machine?”
And the minute I did that, it actually enhanced all my tracks. It’s too bad we
didn’t do this sooner, to get some of the 111 East stuff, because I’m thankful
that I was on the label, but I wasn’t too proud of the productions compared to
once I finally developed a sound. But the minute that you had these rough, raw
drum sounds going on, it completely enhanced the track. Again, even with the
quantise on the drums. One of the other things to notice is this was the first
EP. I’ve always been into putting positive messages in my work, and then I
started to put subliminal messages about God, without being too overt or too
in-your-face about it. In this track, if you listen to the samples closely,
it’s saying, “He can solve it, trust love.”
EMMA WARREN 
It’s playing at the moment, can you find a bit and show us where they are?
Todd Edwards 
On that particular track?
[music continues]
[singing along] It’s saying, “He can solve it, trust love. He can solve it,
trust is what love’s about.” So, whatever, I started doing that and I don’t
know, I just wanted people to know that positive things come from God, and
that beauty comes from God, and most people don’t really associate God with
anything positive, to be honest.
EMMA WARREN 
One thing that I was interested in, actually, because you were brought up
Catholic...
Todd Edwards 
Well, Catholic, sorry, go on...
EMMA WARREN 
Yeah, so a portion of your life, you were brought up in the Catholic faith.
Todd Edwards 
Catholic until second grade, and then this small, non-denominational fire-and-brimstone church that almost destroyed me after that.
EMMA WARREN 
Even worse than the Catholics? Wow, that’s some job.
Todd Edwards 
Yes, no, no, definitely. It gave Catholicism a run for its money, definitely.
EMMA WARREN 
Well, because the thing I was interested in, as someone who was also brought
up as a Catholic and also totally fell massively in love with house music, I
wondered whether or not you thought there was something about that experience
of being in church, priests telling you stuff, the sort of general feeling and
the musical feeling that you get from Catholicism, or maybe faith in general,
that predisposes you to liking house music?
Todd Edwards 
Well, I definitely, definitely think house music is extremely spiritual. I
think I have my own way of looking at music. I feel like there’s this
instinctual vibe. It’s the harder things, like metal, heavy metal, the harder
dubstep, even maybe some drum & bass, anything that’s hard, it comes from
a more tribal, instinctual place. And then you have the opposite end, which is
the spiritual side, like, things that are soulful, things that are more
musical-based, that come from, I don’t know, from maybe a more cerebral place?
And then there’s everything in the middle, you know, hybrids between the two.
And I think it’s good to have things that have that soulful side. It doesn’t
necessarily have to sound like gospel music, but anything that comes from a
cerebral place, I think, has a longevity about it. I mean, and this is just
like after 20 years of listening to music, things that are usually harder,
that have this massive, instant impact, I think they burn twice as bright and
then they just die out. Like, all the techno music from the ’90s, you know? I
mean, tracks that were huge, like “The
Dominator,” you know? “James
Brown Is Dead,” it’s like, does
anyone in this room really know those tracks? Is anyone studying that? But
yet, you can throw on a Todd Terry track, and it sounds as fresh as it did
when it was first made, and I think most people, they hear these tracks,
they’re classics, they stand the test of time.
EMMA WARREN 
I guess we should move on to something else; house versus techno, doom metal
versus soul aside...
Todd Edwards 
And I’m not knocking, don’t get me wrong, I think they’re both two strong
energy sources, and if you combine them properly, you can make something that
blows up and can last [and] stand the test of time.
EMMA WARREN 
Sticking, actually, slightly with this faith aspect, I know that you dropped
out of active faith for a while, before re-finding your place, a place that
suited you within a faith context. And I just wondered whether or not you were
making these spiritual-sounding house/garage records, you were making this
music whilst you were not in the faith, and the kind of music brought you back
to it, or whether or not coming back into faith took you to the music? Like,
which way around did it happen?
Todd Edwards 
Uh...
EMMA WARREN 
We’re talking about the records you were making at this time.
Todd Edwards 
You know what? How long have you been a journalist now? I mean, honestly, you
ask some of the most amazingly intelligent questions. They’re so challenging.
No, seriously! It’s like, when you’ve been asked questions year after year,
and everyone uses the same slate, you’re really challenging. I feel stupid
right now. It’s amazing!
[applause]
EMMA WARREN 
Well, I have a slight...
Todd Edwards 
 [laughs]
EMMA WARREN 
With that question...
Todd Edwards 
I’m gonna get the answers to you...
EMMA WARREN 
Well, I will, but the thing is, actually, interestingly, with that question, I
spoke to Zed Bias and I
said to him, “I’m interviewing Todd Edwards. What would you ask him?” And that
was his question. So he’s the person who is supposed to be super-brainy.
Todd Edwards 
OK, well, still and all, no, but the other ones before, it’s like, “Come
again?”
EMMA WARREN 
Because his question was, “What came first? Religion, or the kind of music
that sounded like they were songs in praise of God?”
Todd Edwards 
I think, you know what it is, I think it kind of walked hand-in-hand. I mean,
in my twenties I was a mess, I have no problem saying it. I don’t even care to
remember most of my twenties, you know? I think that even in high school, I
started to find myself naturally starting to infuse God into my work. And it
wasn’t anything forced, it just kind of came natural. And then again, like I
said, with the beginning of making house music, I wanted to write something
relevant, you know? And you had spoken earlier, when we were just talking
about gospel house music, I didn’t listen to a lot of gospel house music, but
there were a lot of dance tracks that would have just simple phrases, like
“Freedom,” or “Joy,” or just like “Love,” and it was just, they were so
simple, that they almost became cliché to me. Or “Unity,” that was another
one, and they’re great themes, don’t get me wrong. That is house music; it
brings us all together. But I wanted to get more specific and take it to a
more specific love, and a specific unity. And God was that for me. I had
really rough times in, I tried to write about those, again, it’s almost like
when you feel like you’re bottoming out, you kind of throw your hands up. And
even in later years, to be honest, I felt like I needed a mission. Like, I
needed something to live for, to be honest. I mean, I really did hit a point
where it’s just like, “Why am I here? Why do I have to be here?” Not that I
would ever be suicidal, but I just felt the need to try to spread [love]. I
went through a healing process, and I wanted to spread that love with everyone
else. Like, “Hey, this happened to me, this is what got me through it, maybe
it could do it for you, maybe it can’t, but at least I could try to throw that
out there. If you hear the message, great, if not, the music is still good
enough.” You know?
EMMA WARREN 
So, when you were making tracks like “The
Praise,” was that in response to
having found faith again, or at a point where you hadn’t yet?
Todd Edwards 
That was still early on and I would say the first couple years out of high
school, I just had that little rebellious attitude. Like I said, I had
religion forced down my throat. I mean, I love my dad dearly, but it was just
religious arguments growing up. And my nephew knows that one. Yeah, yeah. So I
kind of kept God at arm’s length, per se. But I still had that thing, like I
said, I wanted to make positive messages. And it wasn’t like I hated God but I
just think I got more involved as years went on. I had a couple down points
right before those tracks dropped. I can give you a personal story. I was
working my butt off. I don’t know if you know what Latin freestyle is. It kind of sounds like 2-step, but it was big in the late ‘80s, and
there was a certain music producer named Andy Panda
Tripoli. The first
track I ever really tried to shop was a freestyle track called “Rejection,” it
was about trying to ask a girl out. And his wisdom to me and my friend was
like, “Eat, sleep and shit music,” that’s what he said. And that’s exactly
what I did, when most people were going out to college parties, I was home on
a Friday night working on music, and kept trying to do it. And when you work
so hard at something, and you’re young, you want instant results, you know?
You just think that your second record, or your second track, should blow up
or something. So I had a couple things out, and I always wanted to have my
music played on this one radio station that DJ Disciple had. I loved his show. I
mean, DJ Disciple’s show was amazing. It was college radio and everyone tuned
in to hear the newest tracks before they were out. That was the other thing,
too, it’s like, you have the internet, you can get stuff on SoundCloud. Back
then, it was, to have a dubplate, or something before anyone else, that was
like an amazing, “Oh my God! What is that?” “It’s not out yet,” you know?
“It’s Masters At Work,” or something. But I wanted my track played on his
show, and the first couple releases I did on 111, nothing, you know? And my
friend came along, he was going out and stuff, he made one track in his
bedroom and brought it to the Sound Factory Bar. Little Louie
Vega was
upstairs, in the main room, downstairs was DJ
Camacho. Now, DJ Camacho, he passed away, but he was a really
big teddy-bear of a guy, really nice DJ from Jersey. He would have a cassette
deck that actually had speed control on that, which at the time, no one really
had that, and would just play loads of cassettes of people just giving them
their demo. So my friend gave it to him, and everyone was reacting in the
room, and that was the first time I ever felt jealousy, like, this coveting
feeling. I went home depressed that night. And honestly, I mean, he was my
best friend, so I felt more guilty about that than anything. And I told him
about it, but it was just like, I felt horrible about myself. But I was
thinking, like, “I’m busting my ass doing this, and he comes along and just
does this one track and all of a sudden...” You know, that was a horrible
feeling, ’cause knowing how much time I’d been putting in.
EMMA WARREN 
And had you been giving your music out as well?
Todd Edwards 
Well, I had official releases, this wasn’t even an official release. This was
just something he did, recorded on cassette, and DJ Disciple came up and he’s
like, “What this?” And I’m like, “Really?” I felt horrible for both reasons,
for the jealousy aspect and whatever. But that week I actually came up with a
couple tracks that were out put on Nervous Records and stuff. But I got the
response from Disciple, and I felt redeemed, per se. And I felt better, and I
realised having faith is definitely a good place to be.
EMMA WARREN 
And also, maybe a tiny bit of friendly competition, friendly rivalry can help
as well.
Todd Edwards 
[laughs] Well, you know what the thing is, I’m not a very competitive
person. It was just like I said, I mean, I’m living, breathing this stuff, and
I guess I was judging the fact that I didn’t feel like he was, too. ’Cause
again, we were all going out to college parties, my friends were in frat
houses and stuff, but I was just jealous. It was just your normal human
jealousy, you know?
EMMA WARREN 
And there’s nothing wrong with that. I’ll think you find a few people in the
room who will have maybe experienced something similar. So, what shall we hear
a bit of then?
Todd Edwards 
What have you got?
EMMA WARREN 
Well, ’cause we were talking about “The Praise.”
Todd Edwards 
Well, there’s a couple, I mean, it depends what you want to hear. Like, “Saved
My Life” is a landmark track in my [discography] that put me on the map.
“Alabama Blues,” you could, if you wanna, you have the before-and-after.
EMMA WARREN 
Yeah, we’ve got that here. We could head to France. I tell you what, let’s
hear a little bit more of your music that set you up first, before we head
into some foreign climes.
Todd Edwards 
OK, that’s fine.
EMMA WARREN 
Yeah? So what we gonna go for? “Saved My Life”?
Todd Edwards 
“Saved My Life.” That was one of the tracks that put me on the map as Todd
Edwards.
(music: Todd Edwards - “Saved My
Life”)
[comments over music] And, funny enough, I honestly made the track, and this
was after a night of listening to Little Louie Vega spin, and they did a track
under Hardrive called “Bass
Tone.” And it’s just got this
really hard, like, ‘choo choo choo’. And then there was another track by
Barbara Tucker called “I Get
Lifted,” and it was just these
amazing vibes and that night influenced like two weeks’ worth of brand-new
tracks, and this was one of them. And then, the funny thing is I lost
confidence in it. I wasn’t gonna put it out, and my ex-manager was like, “No,
we’re putting this out. This is great.”
EMMA WARREN 
I tell you what, it’s amazing how many people who’ve got landmark tracks say
they really nearly didn’t put it out. I think maybe that feeling of nearly not
putting it out is a sign that you really should.
Todd Edwards 
Yeah.
[music continues / applause]
Thank you.
EMMA WARREN 
Actually, it just occurs to me, before we start taking it out of national, we
should talk a little bit more about the famous aspect of your sampling style,
and maybe play something to illustrate it, and perhaps you can kind of break
down what went into a track.
Todd Edwards 
Sure, yeah.
EMMA WARREN 
So the thing that you’re kind of famous for is kind of using tiny, tiny, tiny
samples...
Todd Edwards 
Micro-samples, yeah.
EMMA WARREN 
...Micro-samples. You know, like, 50, 75, I don’t know, however many you would
have in a track.
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, the earlier tracks didn’t have as many, I didn’t have room on the
sampler to do that. But as I got more equipment, I started to go crazy, it
could be more than a hundred in a track, at times.
EMMA WARREN 
So I’m interested, as well, like why you would do that. Because, in a way,
there’d be people who might say, “We can’t do that. That’s wrong. That’s too
many.” There’d be a certain type of person or a certain type of artist that
would think that would be the wrong thing to do. So, how did you end up in a
situation where you just went mental and did so many?
Todd Edwards 
Well, I never really read reviews. My ex-manager, I mean, all managers, they
shelter you from the negativity, and I wasn’t looking for any criticism, so
basically I based my career on how well the remixes were coming in. Like, if
remixes were coming in, I knew I was doing something right. If they weren’t,
there were times when things died down and then all of a sudden you do
something, and all of a sudden, bam, you’re back on the map. But, I don’t
know, I mean, people were accepting of this, of a lot of samples. Like that
one in particular is a good example. If I didn’t know Stevie Wonder’s Songs
in the Key of Life, that song would have never came to fruition, because that
whole choir-y sound is from the first track on that album. Well, that is to
say when we released it on London Records, I had to re-sing most of the parts,
so we’ll just say that it was re-sung and not the actual samples.
EMMA WARREN 
Of course.
Todd Edwards 
So yeah, I think people were intrigued by it, I guess. I mean, I never really
asked anyone why they liked what I did, I just kept doing it, you know? But I
can say, at this point in time, things have gotten a lot simpler. I’m not one
to just change directions just because I wanna follow... I don’t like
following other people’s trends. But I do believe in growing from them, and
again, you take what other people are doing and let it infuse into your work.
Living in LA has definitely had a major impact with that. Especially, first of
all, deep house in itself has just blown up again. You were gonna ask this
anyway, so, if you don’t mind, let’s just go right into it. I have it in my
SoundCloud account and you see YouTube, and I’m not dissatisfied with the
amount of hits that I get, but it’s like I’ll max out maybe on the track about
7,000 hits, and then I’ll go to some house track, and it would have, like,
50,000 hits. And I’m listening to the track, and I’m like, “OK, it’s good,”
you know what I mean? But I’m not blown away by it, and so I’m thinking, “OK,
what am I missing here?” It’s like, “I don’t think I’m a bad producer.” So,
and then I realise, it’s all supply and demand. It’s like the garage stuff
becomes [obsolete]. There was one time where it was huge, in the late ’90s,
early 2000s. Things flare up and then they go back down into like an
underground thing, it’s a niche market, you know? And because I was one of the
innovators, you know, there’s me and a few others that innovated the sound, I
was continually able to still get work and DJ based on that. And I’m very
blessed to have the respect, but at the same time I started to look at music
as a communication more than just a musical form. So even though I want to
create great art, I would like to be able to reach as many people as I can. So
I was like, “How do you do that without losing your integrity and just jumping
on someone else’s bandwagon?” And fortunately, deep house coming back around
is amazing because my roots are in deep house. And my earlier tracks were more
deep house than this other direction, I took the UK garage thing into [another
direction]. Again, excessive amounts of sampling. So I started to streamline
my tracks a little bit in remixes. And it’s paid off, smoothing it out a
little bit, still has the essence of what I’m doing but reaching more house
market than just the niche UK garage market.
EMMA WARREN 
Well, I think it would be nice to talk a bit more about the rough stuff at
some point, but I guess, we’ve kind of arrived at a point where we probably
should, we could possibly play the new mix you just did for Jessie Ware.
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, that would be great. That’s a good example of how LA has been
influencing me.
(music: Jessie Ware – “No To Love (Todd Edwards
remix)” / applause)
EMMA WARREN 
So do you want to do us a little kind of kit breakdown, or a technique
breakdown of what you did on that mix?
Todd Edwards 
Well, basically, with this one, usually, if you’re familiar with my style, for
years I kind of did like this verse-bridge-chorus. I mean, I grew up on ’80s
music, a lot of music was much more intricate, I think, back then. Even back
to the ’70s, if you listen to ABBA, if you listen to some of their songs, it
could be four, maybe even five different parts where the music just
transitions from one thing to the other to the other. So I was doing that with
most of my tracks, like, the music in the verse part, or where the verse would
be if there was vocals would be, it’d be bridge, chorus. In a track like this,
there’s still three different parts, but it was more the journey, almost more
like “Saved My Life,” where it starts out one way and then transitions into
another way. It’s still even more complicated than some of the stuff I’ve done
over the last few months with remixes and whatnot. But I think this is a good
example of a smoothed-out, housier track, still embodying the sampling style
per se. Just not as crazy.
EMMA WARREN 
And what do you favor kit-wise?
Todd Edwards 
You know what? Look, I like to explore different things. I love complexity.
But there is an amazing art to simplicity that I really stopped looking into.
To a certain extent, I think especially early on, there was a bit of a cop out, like, “Oh, this part isn’t strong enough. Let me make a second, or a
third, or a fourth.” It’s almost through my own insecurity of making music, I
was starting to add more and more, just in case I go, “You’re not satisfied
with this part, here’s another one.” You know? In more recent time, I’ve
really kind of thought about the concept of, “Let’s see if we can make good
simple music.” And so far the reaction’s been good, and I’m like, “Well, I
guess it’s not rocket science.” Actually, it’s kind of easy. The amount of
sampling I do, for those older-style tracks, takes a while. I mean, it used to
take two to three weeks to make a track. As the equipment evolved, it would be
quicker and quicker. And then, if you needed a track in a day, I could do, I
think, a decent Todd track in a day. With house-based stuff, because you don’t
have to do as much sample research, it’s actually a quicker process, without
losing, I think, the quality. It’s just, it’s more about playing keys and just
throwing a few samples in there. So each one has its benefits and pluses and
negatives.
EMMA WARREN 
So, in those two to three weeks, what would you be having to be doing?
Todd Edwards 
Well, especially when I had the earlier equipment, I was building the track as
I was going along. When the equipment evolved, I would build sample libraries,
where I was sampling up 25 samples on the keys, then save that bank, do
another one, do another one. So I’d be using, like, four banks to start with.
Almost like, if you’re a chef, you have all your materials, your flour, eggs,
whatever, and then you just start experimenting with it. So that was the older
times. In the beginning times, I’d literally build the track as I was going.
So I would get the drums laid down, find a sound, start there. Then I’d go
through a record, try to find an interesting sound, if I liked it, I’d sample
it, try to add it in, see if it worked, if not, moved on to the next thing. So
it was really just, as you’re going along, you’re looking through records.
Plus, I didn’t have a lot of sampling time. So if I found something I liked
and I was running out sample time, if it was a 33 RPM record, I’d have to put
it on 45 to speed it up, so it would take less sampling space. And then play
it low, which would give this great artifact sound, where, if you played it
too low, it really started to sound like a little distorted.
EMMA WARREN 
Hence, two to three weeks.
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, exactly.
EMMA WARREN 
Now, obviously you had a massive connection with the UK and with France, but
France came first, didn’t it?
Todd Edwards 
France, yeah, I would say France came first but then England took off. France
was funny, because I was listening to DJ Disciple’s show, and I heard this
French record and then all of the sudden they’re rattling off different names
and different producers they’re influenced by, and then I heard, “...And Mr.
Todd Edwards.” And I’m like, “Wait, wait, was that my name?” And it turned out
to be St Germain. And then two
weeks after that I get a call to remix one of his tracks.
EMMA WARREN 
But you’re on “Teachers” as
well, aren’t you, on the Daft Punk track? You know, kind of stuck between
Mike Dearborn and Romanthony, stuck
right in the middle, between kind of techno and the most mysterious of house
producers. So you hear this record, and then you get a call, and then you end
up doing...
Todd Edwards 
Yeah, well, they wanted me to do a remix for “Alabama Blues.” And it’s crazy
because, and this is the thing, it’s funny, back in that time, because I was
going through so much in my twenties, you know, music wasn’t being turned out
like every five minutes, where you were putting out a track every week. I
mean, labels were doing it, but producers, I don’t think, were doing it as
much. So I remember there were some dry spells where it was like a few months
off and then all of a sudden a remix came in, you know? It’s almost like,
“Wow, I haven’t really done anything in a few months. Is this gonna be okay?”
The funny thing about that, too, is, again, I was dealing with a vocal mix,
and I had to borrow my friend’s Ensoniq EPS, because there wasn’t enough
sample time in my own keyboard to do the actual music and have the vocal at
the same time. You kids have it very good, let me tell you. [laughs]
EMMA WARREN 
Should we do a little compare and contrast?
Todd Edwards 
Yeah.
EMMA WARREN 
OK, so we’re gonna play the original, or your mix. 
(music: St Germain - “Alabama Blues”)
(music: St Germain – “Alabama Blues (Todd Edwards dub
remix)”)
But funny enough, it’s only been over the last couple of years that people have
been discovering that I was the voice on [Daft Punk’s] “Face To Face.” I guess because I
worked with Surkin as well, and I sang
on a track that we did together. But everyone’s like, “You sang ‘Face To
Face’?” And, you know, people have been requesting me to sing. Which is funny,
because I was getting more requests to sing than I was to produce. I’m like,
“You know, I am a producer, you know?” Right? So take what you can get, you
know?
EMMA WARREN 
So this time round, with Random Access Memories, what’s your involvement
this time around? I mean, I guess some of us have seen the
Collaborators videos, so we know something, but what
can you tell us?
Todd Edwards 
Well, again, I knew they wanted me to sing. And I was the only connection
between Discovery and this album, and obviously, they asked, I wasn’t like,
“Yeah, I’ll think about it.” Of course, I was going to be onboard, no matter
what they wanted me to do. And it was just great to reconnect with them,
because it was years since I’ve actually hung out with them. And it’s really
cool when you know really good people and you can just pick up where you left
off. That’s when you’re good friends with someone, it’s really cool. I got out
to Hollywood and they played a track that they wanted me to sing on. And it’s
very gospel-y sounding, it reminds me of like a Doobie Brothers-type track. It
even has like some country sound to it. It’s completely different from “Face
To Face.” So I was often wondering, like, people might be expecting this dance
track, and it’s not like you can’t dance to it, but it’s not a dance track.
It’s almost like more rock-based, to be honest. But it’s a very contemporary-sounding song, so Thomas wanted me to see if I can put some cut-ups in there.
Like I said in the video, I was adding all these spaces. I was basically doing
what I would do, you know, like sampling-wise, except I had all the musical
stems and then I just put spaces in between until it sounded like something I
was happy with. And I really, honestly didn’t know that he wanted to use it as
the chorus. I didn’t know until he looped it around. And they didn’t play,
when they edited the Collaborators video, but he said to me, “What did you
think? I just wanted to use it for an eight-bar break?” I’m like, “Yeah, I
didn’t know. I mean, I didn’t know what you wanted.” So I was really honored
that it became part of the track. And he gave me the biggest compliment,
because he’s like, “You know, you actually helped kind of save the track.”
Because it was so contemporary-sounding, it didn’t have any vibe that was
along the electronics line. So it’s nice to know when you have an impact on
something that’s part of a bigger masterpiece. And then me and Thomas wrote
the song together, we sat in a room in this studio, which, you know, recorded
people like Karen Carpenter and Frank Sinatra. I mean, the funny thing is...
EMMA WARREN 
So where’s this?
Todd Edwards 
Well, I don’t know if it’s supposed to be a disclosed location.
EMMA WARREN 
OK, OK, somewhere.
Todd Edwards 
I’d have to kill you all.
EMMA WARREN 
That’s a lot of people to kill.
Todd Edwards 
Well, I can tell you where the studio is. Well, whatever, it’s a really well-known studio, there’s a lot of people that passed through there. But it was
really cool to know that the microphone that I was singing on, aside from
being more than my car is worth, it was the actual mic that Frank Sinatra sang
on. So not even just one of them; it’s the mic. So I’m sitting here, that’s
a crazy feeling.
EMMA WARREN 
Did you think, “Ha! Take that, people who laughed at me in high school”?
Todd Edwards 
 [laughs] Yeah. No, the funny thing is, it was my best friends that teased
me all the time, so really I have a vendetta against them, then. No. No, it’s
cool, because it made me think, actually. Like, why did I give up something
that I loved so much early on? It just shows the vulnerability of being human,
especially, I think, as producers, part of being a producer you want to be
loved, you need an audience, and I’ve been in it for 20 years and it’s still
not easy to hear negative criticism. You know, no matter how much success you
have, you wanna be loved, you know what I mean? You need that connection and
have joy from your work. So to have people picking up on this now, it’s almost
like I’m doing something later on in my career that most people do at the
beginning of their career, whether it be DJing or just singing. It’s kind of
like a renaissance for me.
EMMA WARREN 
I saw Nile Rodgers saying, offering you free, unfettered access...
Todd Edwards 
How sick was that?
EMMA WARREN 
...To his full archive. What was his exact words?
Todd Edwards 
I don’t even remember off-hand, it was just like, we found all these old jams,
he’s like, maybe “Put your touch on it,” to paraphrase it. But that’s amazing.
You know, even just in the Collaborators video, it’s like you have Giorgio Moroder, then
mine, then Nile Rodgers. Like I’m sandwiched between two titans from the ’70s
and ’80s. I mean, it’s a complete honor to be part of that.
EMMA WARREN 
So is that archive access gonna happen, then?
Todd Edwards 
We’re definitely going to pursue that. Definitely. I would love to get my
hands on that. You know, I mean, the thing about it is, like, when you hear
the track I did on Random Access Memories with Thomas and Guy-Man, it’s
funny, because you can hear the cut-ups, but it’s very smooth. It’s not like
it’s this overt, sloppy, chopped thing. It’s very polished, and I think it’s
one example of how my style can fit into different genres, which I intend to
show further as I’m going along in my career.
EMMA WARREN 
So, France obviously led you to some interesting places, culminating in a kind
of very interesting place right now. But England, London in particular, took
you to you some other places, maybe in a more intense way? I guess, you’ve
talked before how you found out, you started to hear that people in London
were into your tracks, but what was it that made you realise that something
significant was happening? That a new sort of version of UK street music was
basically being based on your sound?
Todd Edwards 
It really happened in a very subtle way. Because, again, there was really no
internet at the time, or at least, I wasn’t connected to it, and I had moved
on with my sound. I was always taking my cues from Masters At Work. Masters At
Work did these, like I said, slew of remixes in the early ‘90s, and then
started to incorporate live bass players into their work. And they were almost
making disco-based tracks. And then there was also the Basement
Jaxx, that was
another thing, being introduced to their sound. They were doing these disco-y,
Latin-y sounding things, and that was really inspiring, so I had moved on to
almost less cut-ups and more taking the samples and trying to make it sound
like a disco band when I was doing these remixes. And I had a lot of success
doing that. I did a track, a remix, on Nervous Records, called “Panther
Party.” And that hit #1
on the dance charts, at least in the magazines, like DJ Magazine. There was a
track called “Jump To My Beat,”
by Wildchild, that I had remixed, and that was the first one that really hit
off. And again, it’s just like it starts a slew, a chain reaction of remixes
but they were all disco-based style. And then all of a sudden my manager’s
like, “There’s something going on in England. People are picking up on your
older sound.” And my first thing wasn’t even joy, it was like, “Man, I gotta
go back?” You know? “I gotta go back and do this again? I’ve moved on!” You
know, it’s like, “I’m evolving into something else.” So I almost had to
relearn my own style, which was difficult, because when you’re in one mindset
and then you gotta go, like, reverse gears, it was a little frustrating.
EMMA WARREN 
That’s an interesting conundrum for an artist to find themselves in. That
hadn’t occurred to me that that would be the case. I guess, from a UK
perspective, suddenly you were the person that everyone was referencing. And
not just kind of people from one style, it was grime people and your kind of
what would be grime, and garage-y people. It just seemed like across the
board, everyone was looking to you. But they were making so many different
types of sounds, but for you, you were having to revisit something.
Todd Edwards 
Yes, yeah, it’s crazy.
EMMA WARREN 
How did that that revisiting, like, what did that do to you? Or do for you? I
don’t mean so much in success, but creatively.
Todd Edwards 
No, I know what you mean. No, I’m glad it happened, because I embraced it once
I got back into it. I really did. I think that’s where I started to get very
complicated, because I realised that with sampling, it’s an art form. You can
make a really great musical collage. I don’t know, you listen to Mozart and
you just hear how many notes he puts in his work, and I loved that complexity,
to have everything make sense in a track but just to have so many things going
on but still work harmoniously through it. And that was something I wanted to
evolve into. So, for me, it was just continuously exploring new samples. I
started sampling from the ’60s instead of the ’70s. I learned more about music
through sampling than I did from actually just sitting down and listening to
music.
EMMA WARREN 
But, from your point of view, which of your records were the ones that had the
most impact on what became 2-step?
Todd Edwards 
Well, as far as 2-step, the funny thing is is people associate me with 2-step,
but I had nothing to do with the onslaught of 2-step. I forgot the name of the
producer, he did a remix for “Never Let You Go.” Go on.
EMMA WARREN 
So, if it wasn’t that bit then, the question really then is which track, for
you, is the one that you think had the most impact in the UK?
Todd Edwards 
I would say there’s several. There’s “Saved My Life,” “Alabama Blues,” which
you heard, and there was another track, I did a remix for Sounds Of One called
“As I Am,” and I think that’s
considered a classic. I mean, I get to play it and it still gets a really good
response, even to people that don’t really know the earlier UK garage stuff.
EMMA WARREN 
And what kind of connection did you have with those artists?
Todd Edwards 
 Well, “Saved My Life,” obviously was me, St Germain I didn’t really know,
like I said.
EMMA WARREN 
I mean, the people in the UK that were being picking up on your sound and
being inspired by it, what connection did you have with them?
Todd Edwards 
With them. Well, I got to know best, I knew Tuff
Jam, which was Karl “Tuff Enuff”
Brown and Matt “Jam” Lamont. We developed more of a rapport. And then after
that, who I consider to be my biggest supporter, is DJ
EZ. Which, if you don’t
know him, look him up. He has a Boiler Room out, and
he’s a massively inspiring, technical DJ. And I don’t want to say underrated,
because I hate that term when people use that.
EMMA WARREN 
Hugely influential.
Todd Edwards 
He’s hugely influential. I think that, again, he’s so known in the UK scene
that there might not be people that know him as well in the American scene.
But you watch him DJ and he plays CDJs the way you’d play a drum machine. It’s
amazing to watch. I’m dumbfounded, you know?
EMMA WARREN 
So what kind of connections did you make with those people? Was it just, like,
if they had come to the US, they’d come and find you? Or were you in the UK,
or were they writing you postcards?
Todd Edwards 
Well, I mean, I winded up going to Karl [Brown]’s studio. We collaborated on some
tracks there. They also came to my studio in Jersey, so the first time I
actually met them face-to-face was in ‘98 at the Winter Music Conference.
Again, you talk on the phone, with the internet, even more now, it’s just like
everything brings you closer together. One of the first times I got to hang
out with DJ EZ is he brought me over for this 4by4 gig at Time & Envy. And
that was the first dose...
EMMA WARREN 
And when was that?
Todd Edwards 
I think that was around 2002, 2003, it might have been a little later. The
years are just running into each other.
EMMA WARREN 
In the mid-2000s.
Todd Edwards 
But the thing is, what do you call it? That was the first dose of knowing what
a huge audience was like. I mean, I knew it was popular, but the reaction I
got from these 1,500 people was epic, you know?
EMMA WARREN 
How did you cope with the accents?
Todd Edwards 
I pretended I understood what they were saying. Nah, I mean, some of them are
really strong, and even just the slang, it’s just like I needed an interpreter
to understand what the hell they were talking about.
EMMA WARREN 
I wondered where there were any UK garage records you wished you’d written,
that you had made.
Todd Edwards 
No. I mean, I have my own agenda. I mean, like I’m looking to just make great
art, so I don’t covet anyone. I think, to be honest, if there’s anyone that I
put as a role model as to what I would like to accomplish, even on an
independent level, is Daft. I mean, they put on an amazing live show, they’ve
scored a film. Like, these are things that I still want to put together a live
show, I just haven’t done it. You know? And even just to get into scoring is
something I’d really like to do.
EMMA WARREN 
And is the live show going to be happening in any shape or form?
Todd Edwards 
Well, right now I’m putting together a vocal album, and it was Thomas’ idea.
It’s like, “Your vocals should be the center point of who you are and
connecting the past and the present.” He’s like, “You know, I think you should
focus on songwriting.” Scion AV is backing me for an album, so I’m going to be
releasing with them. And Peter Franco, who’s the
engineer for Random Access Memories, mixed down the album, he was like, “I
wanna work with you.” So it was, like, “Of course, I’m gonna say yes, he’s an
amazing engineer and a great producer.” He also produces the group Jamaica. So
I’ll be writing songs, we’re gonna work on polishing them up and then making
the productions enhance the songs and then basically I’ll probably remix the
album myself to make it dance-y, but the album’s gonna be more of a vocal
album.
EMMA WARREN 
Cool. Lovely. I think we should pass it out to questions from you fine folk.
Do we have the microphone to hand? Excellent. So, I didn’t really give you any
warning. Does anyone have a question ready, or should we continue here for one
minute.
Todd Edwards 
The natives are getting restless.
EMMA WARREN 
 [laughs] OK, so I’m gonna be putting it out to you lot in a minute for
questions. I’m sure you’ll have some ready. In the meantime, is there anything
else that you’ve got coming up that we should know about?
Todd Edwards 
Like I said, the vocal album is definitely something I’m looking to release
around September, October. After that, I really just want to do more
collaborations. I worked on a track with Para
One and I’m looking to do more
with him. I would love to work with Surkin again. And there’s just a lot of
vocals I’m looking to work with. Also, I saw DJ
Falcon, who also has a track on the
album, and honestly, I’m at a point where it’s like I’ve proven what I can do.
I really just want to enjoy myself and have some fun collaborating with
friends in the industry. I also want to take the sampling thing to a different
place as well, and maybe we’ll reach a mass audience or just a small group of
people, but it’s a personal creative goals, and then there’s the concept of
keeping the dance thing going. I have a small label called Nu Trend
Music. Honestly, I did it more
as a hobby, and I’ve been so tied to i! Records for so long, I just wanted
something of my own. I haven’t really developed it, or even promoted it, and
I’ve made some money off of it already, which was cool. But it’s probably
gonna be for the diehard fans, release, like, UK garage stuff that the diehard
fans want. So that’s definitely the future as well.
EMMA WARREN 
And didn’t you want to make a jazz record as well?
Todd Edwards 
Yeah there’s an album called Jazz Love Spirit, it was me and a couple other
producers: Kevin Yost, who’s on i! Records. Unfortunately, there’s a lot that
are under fake names, which I didn’t come up with, but it was just to make it
seem like that it had more people involved. But it’s Jazz Love Spirit on i!
Records. And it was basically no samples, really. There’s only one track that
I sampled. The rest of it was just all e-playing and just jazz solos and
stuff. I can do a lot more than people know. It’s just a matter of taking the
time to showcase it, putting more music out.
EMMA WARREN 
Excellent, excellent. So what do we have, question-wise, from the people?
Audience Member 
Hi. It’s a real pleasure. I would like to know if there is any logical process
involved during sample searching, and how to figure out a way to match the
key, ’cause sometimes samples come from different stuff, with different keys,
different tempos, and if there can be a strategy to figure out how to meld
them together in an organic way.
Todd Edwards 
Part of it is your ear, your ability to hear when two things are in key. Also,
a lot of the sampling time, I’m usually looking for certain textures. I’m a
big fan of female vocals. I also like the way organs sound with cymbal sounds
on top of it. Almost like that gives you this scratchy sound with organ.
Again, sampling is really more about what you’re using for your palate of
colors. Like, if you like to work with red, black, blue, whatever. So it’s the
same thing. As far as matching the keys, like I said, it comes from your ear.
You know, having your ear. And then, on top of that, what gets frustrating
sometimes is if you have a track that’s in a key, and you have a sample that’s
off by more than three half-steps, the sample loses its quality. If you pitch
something up five or six notes, it starts to sound almost like... Even if you
used the formant to break it down, it just loses its quality, if you pitch it
down too low to match with the key that you’re in. So, it’s usually samples
that are within three notes of the key that I’m playing in, but there’s no
beginning strategy. I literally just sample libraries and just have them ready
when I’m working on a remix or if I’m starting a track. I used to start with
just four libraries of 25 samples each, and now I do like 16, so I’m starting
out between three to 500 samples, just so I don’t have to go back the drawing
board to find more when I’m working on a remix or a track.
Audience Member 
Thank you.
Todd Edwards 
You’re welcome.
Audience Member 
Do you work on a
DAW, or
do you use more the sampler? And if you use a DAW, do you work in audio, or do
you trigger things from MIDI?
Todd Edwards
Did you say a “door”?
Participant: 
DAW, like a digital audio workstation.
Todd Edwards 
For the longest time, I’ve been using Digital
Performer, and I used a AKAI
S6000 sampler, which still used
the zip disks, so I was still buying those off of eBay. I just switched up to
ProTools, and I just invested in Kontakt Komplete. Only for a sampler, until I heard all the sounds that came with it.
It was better than anything that I had, with the exception of a Juno 106, it
was better than anything I had in my studio. So we’re definitely streamlining
the studio. I also bought
Melodyne; I’ve been using
that. But, you know, ProTools is the replacement, as far as what I’ve been
using.
Audience Member 
Cool. Thank you.
Todd Edwards 
You’re welcome.
Audience Member 
You said that there’s a lot of ups and downs when you’re doing what you love,
and I think we’ve all experienced highs and then you can go way down low and
just feel like, “Why did that just happen? I don’t get it.” And when you’re in
the low part, do you feel the need to change anything, or do you just kind of
stay on the course and wait to come back up? Or do you feel pressure to, “Oh,
am I doing something wrong? And should I change, or just stay true to
yourself, pretty much?”
Todd Edwards 
The thing is, I don’t think that you should just jump on a bandwagon.
Audience Member 
Well, I meant, like, within your style, specifically. Not like, “Oh, I need to
do something completely different.” Like, “Do I need to change my style a
little, or...?”
Todd Edwards
Early on, I realised there was no logic in music. James Bratton on 111 East
said, he’s like, “There’s no logic.” And he’s right. There are tracks that
I’ll do that I personally love. I think they’re amazing and get a minimal
response. And then there might be a track that I do that I absolutely think is
just “Enh,” and it gets an amazing response. And I’m like, “I don’t get it. I
just don’t get it.” So I try to make crap music, it’s usually the crap music
that does well. No, I mean, honestly, I think that the hardest thing but the
thing that’s most important is to have a thick skin. To be honest, in my
twenties, I wanted to quit every five minutes. Honestly, I really believe God
intervened, because every time that I wanted to quit making music, a door
would open. A remix would come in, or even the potential of a remix to come
in. And I honestly believe if I didn’t have the success that I had, I’d still
be extremely unstable and insecure about it. I think that my confidence
probably came from the success I had, which isn’t really healthy, but we’re
artists. We’re all a little bit nuts. The one thing that I really learned from
just working a regular job for two years and being miserable at it is I’d
rather be poor and do what I love than to... I was dying a little and I was
making good money. I mean, I literally could’ve had the stable life after
that. But I’m like, “I don’t want that.” I mean, think about it. I’ve had a
lot of success, and there’s still a lot of financial stress up and down. I’ve
had a lot of money, I’ve had no money. It’s like, it is, this is part of the
life that you’re living. Just do it because you love to do it; don’t do it
because you’re looking to be famous. Don’t do it just for the money. Do it
because you’re looking to make art, and that you wanna have an audience. And I
think if you stay true to that, you’ll find your audience. And I think it’s
great now, I mean, that’s the beauty of the internet, it’s like, even if
you’re a niche market, you can pull people from all over the place to make up
a market. Like I said, if you could put out a track and you have people
downloading it, you’re making 800 here, 500 here, 200 there, it all adds up,
even on a small level. Does that answer the question?
Audience Member 
Yeah, thank you. I also wanted to ask you about, you had brought up that you
had a manager at a lot of points, and I’ve been asking a lot of artists how
they feel about managers, because it seems to be either they love them or they
hate them, and so I can’t really grasp which one...
Todd Edwards 
I was a very weak person, and I had very little connection to the rest of the
world. My ex-manager basically was my bridge to the music world. And I wasn’t
really big on the internet. I was late in getting on that, so he was the
gatekeeper. I wouldn’t recommend having it that way. Not to get too personal,
but he was a very negative person, and as I matured I saw it for more what it
was. You know, when you’re stuck between a rock and a hard place, like, even
if you recognise the negative situation, you don’t really know where to go. I
literally had to bottom out on a musical scale and get that job before I
actually left the situation. And again, there’s a lot of negative things that
could happen. I think that it can go either way. But I also believe that, now,
on the flipside of everything, my manager, Alexis Rivera, who throws the party
at A Club Called Rhonda in LA, four months with him and there was already a
major buzz with working with him. I think it’s good if you can be a good judge
of character, if you can read people and know what they’re like. Everyone
around me had said negative things about my ex-manager, and I defended him at
points and stuff. When you’re young, you don’t know any better, you’re
immature, and again, it was different. Now, at least, even if you don’t have a
manager, you can go searching for one, you can do stuff through the internet,
whereas before, that person was making all the connections for you. I think
longevity, you need to have a good team behind you. Since I’ve had Alexis,
I’ve gotten a European booking agent, Belinda Law, who’s done amazing work;
I’m always in London, every three months. He books my North American gigs, and
he’s connected me to a lot of different people. I owe him a lot, and I always
sing his praises in interviews and whatnot, so, I think a good manager is
definitely necessary for longevity.
Audience Member 
Cool, thank you.
EMMA WARREN 
’Cause I had something else I did wanna just quickly ask you, before we wrap
up then, and that’s: I wonder sometimes whether or not you hear artists and
feel like they’re almost children of your sound. You know, are there people
that you hear where you think, “Ah, there’s a bit of me in there”?
Todd Edwards 
Well, I mean, there’s a lot of UK kids that... It was funny, DJ Q, from
England, he did a mix of all my stuff,
and it got really big, it got covered by FACT magazine, and he’s a great guy.
He did a dub mix of one of his tracks, and he literally sampled a sample from
a group that I’ve sampled from, I’m like, “Wait a second.” It’s an English
boys choir. I’m like, “There’s no way that he would’ve just found that on his
own if I didn’t sample it.” And there’s other people I’ve heard over the
years, people sampling my drums, people doing the cut-ups the same way. But
then again, I took my sound from MK, so...
EMMA WARREN
And I don’t mean that in a [negative] way, I mean it like, in a way of you
seeing what kind of your thing has created in a completely different
environment. You know, the way Burial sampled saw all those female vocalists
of YouTube or whatever and turned them into something else. Do you hear a
little bit of what you did in those things?
Todd Edwards 
Definitely, definitely. I mean, I’ve heard some dubstep things. But it’s hard
to pinpoint, because there’s a lot of different people that take their
influences from different areas, but it’s definitely recognisable. It’s kind
of funny, ’cause sampling isn’t as big in house music, but I think you can
hear it in a lot of different other forms of electronic music, whether it just
be piano riffs or whatnot. Like, Guy-Man had mentioned, he’s like, you know,
you hear Sebastian, he did the cut-up thing, and then Justice took some stuff
from - at least this is what I’ve heard - it’s like Justice learned from
Sebastian, so it’s like this branch that just trickles out. I’m glad to be
part of the tapestry. It’s cool.
EMMA WARREN 
The ever-modest Todd Edwards. Thank you so much.
Todd Edwards 
Thank you.
