If there’s one thing TOKiMONSTA taught us since she attended the 2010 edition of the Academy as a participant, it’s that she’s never one to settle. The following year she linked up with the mighty Brainfeeder empire and later signed to the Ultra conglomerate to release her 2013 LP Half Shadows. In 2014 she launched her own imprint, Young Art, and released another album titled Desiderium.
In her 2014 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, she went in-depth about making the album, working with Anderson.Paak, and much more.
(music: TOKiMONSTA – “Dusty Stars” / applause)
Emma Warren
Thank you. I think that was a very nice introduction to the next hour. So that’s
from your record Desiderium that you just put out.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes, it is.
Emma Warren
I mean, we’re going to do a little bit of showing the sort of, under-the-hood
shortly. But I thought before we start seeing actually how you made some of
that, perhaps could you tell us what the starting point was for that record?
TOKiMONSTA 
The record I just played… I mean, I can’t really remember at this point. I
think I started off with the percussion and if you listen to the beginning
there is this East Asian percussive sample, and from there I started to build
chords around that and it just kind of built itself. Most of the songs I make
are like that. They just build upon themselves without any specific direction.
Emma Warren
And then if you take it out wider, what was the starting point for the whole piece, the whole album?
TOKiMONSTA 
I guess all my albums are collections of certain periods of my life and there
was no specific, “I’m going to make an album and I want all these songs to
sound like this and I’m going to go and make tracks towards this one goal.” I
decided to make the album after I had made a bunch of tracks. All these songs
reflected that point in my life where I chose to do certain things
stylistically at that point and I learned certain tricks that I wanted to
express in those songs and from there I just picked out the ones I really
liked and turned it into an album.
Emma Warren
So it was more like the album came into being because you had a bunch of songs
that suddenly felt like they could be the beginning of a collection.
TOKiMONSTA 
Exactly.
Emma Warren
Is that a different way of working for you? With the other records that you’ve
done, were they more like the result of a conscious decision, “Oh, I want to
make an album and here’s some time and I’m going to make some tracks”? Is that
a different way of doing it?
TOKiMONSTA 
Not really. All of my albums were put together the same way. I had made a
collection of song and decided, “I think I’m ready to put these together into
an album.” Obviously, I’ve made more tracks than just what ended up on this
album but I decided that these represented the best of what I did during this
time and I just really wanted people to hear them. And I think that putting out
a collection of music versus one song represents more. You can explain a
fuller story, sort of like an anthology; you have all these little stories within one
big book.
Emma Warren
Another thing that’s different on this record is you and your voice as an
instrument is more present on it. Did you have to do any finding of your voice
or did you always know how you sounded?
TOKiMONSTA 
I don’t sound very good, I’ll say that. I can’t sing. But then, as a producer
I’ve always enjoyed working with vocalists. When I’m making a track and I feel
like I want to have a female vocal on it, at that time I’m right there, I’m a female vocal,
it’s real easy for me to decide to do that.
Emma Warren
You’re not going to be late.
TOKiMONSTA 
Exactly, and I know how to accomplish what I want for the track since it’s me
working for me, if that makes sense. I’m very honest. I can’t sing. I sing
really, really, really bad. OK, I’m not the worst singer. We can go to
karaoke together and I can hold my own, but compared to some of the vocalists I
choose to work with, I’m not as adequate as them to some extent. But then, as a
producer, and the way that I decided to work with my vocals in the tracks,
there are tools such as Melodyne and Auto-Tune, and I tend to pitch my vocals
to achieve a goal so I want to treat my vocals more like an instrument than a
focus.
Emma Warren
I wonder if it might be worth giving us a little bit of show and tell on
something to do with what you did with your voice, like maybe an interesting
way or trick you used or something. I’m not saying give away all your secrets,
but perhaps is there an example of a way that you use your voice in an
interesting way or why that pleased you.
TOKiMONSTA 
Show a track?
Emma Warren
Yeah.
TOKiMONSTA 
OK, let’s see. [uses laptop] This is a lot of pressure.
[laughter]
Emma Warren
You’re among friends.
TOKiMONSTA 
I’ll play something older here, it’s good example.
(music: TOKiMONSTA – “Soul To Seoul Pt.2”)
For example, with a track like that the voice doesn’t sound too manipulated
but it is. I doubled the voice and a lot of the harmonies on here are made
from pitching in Ableton. I should show a better example. Let’s see. A trick I
like to use a lot is making the pitch vocal sound artificial on purpose.
Obviously, in Ableton you have the ability to do, or for those of you who do
use Ableton and are aware, you can warp and pitch anything and make it sound
fairly accurate. I tend to like to work with it in a way where I purposely
make it sound stretched or chopped-up so the vocal sounds inauthentic, but on
purpose. With the track that I just showed you as an example, where I’m trying
to make it sound a little bit more accurate, but towards the end I start
layering harmonies on top of each other. Let me see if I can find it.
[music continues]
[comments] So here you’ll be able to hear the vocal sounding a bit morphy, just
pitched up.
[music continues]
I don’t know if it’s that easy for you guys to hear, but like the high vocals
and low vocals are completely pitched. When the chorus comes back in again
there’s even more vocals that end up creating a texture and that’s how I like
to use my vocals in music. I don’t really want you to focus on the singing
ability, more so than just how much the vocals create almost like a pad and
make the songs sound thicker and create an environment. I don’t know if I just
digress but there we go.
Emma Warren
Not at all. Not at all. I think that’s certainly what I asked and definitely
what we want to know. We were going to have a look at a track that you’ve made
as well maybe just as, again, everyone here has their own way of working but
sometimes it’s useful to see what someone else does. What are we looking at
and do you want to talk us through what you did?
TOKiMONSTA 
OK, so this is a track called “Steal My Attention.” This one also has a lot
of examples of me pitching my vocals and I probably should show this one
first. I don’t know why I didn’t, sorry. Let’s see. Can you guys see it okay
from your side or is it a little too zoomed in? I can zoom it out. Alright.
Let’s see. [music]Oops, not the right song. As you can tell I’m a
professional. Oh, the wonders of technology. Sorry, you guys. OK, here we
go. OK, so here’s the track.
[Ableton recording software plays onscreen]
I’ll pause right there, so an example of something else I like to do. Let’s
start it from here. [plays vocal sample] Right here, obviously, we have the
way that you can choose to warp tracks in Ableton so if I want to I can do
pretty complex sounds. [plays vocal sample] I chose to go by beats. I can
make it sound choppy. [plays chopped up vocal sample] These are just small
things. I mean, it’s probably not rocket science, you guys probably already
know how to do this kind of stuff anyways but it’s little things like this in
Ableton or when I produce it I enjoy, in terms of creating glitchy sounds that
are a bit more manual. I mean, obviously there’s a lot of VSTs that exist now
that can twist and rewind and do things like that but this way I can see the
audio and treat the audio, and also print it like this and I can do this effect
on top of that audio. I guess here, let me show you one track.
(music: TOKiMONSTA – “Steal My Attention”)
The song keeps going on and on. I don’t want to bore you guys, but you
can see obviously, there’s some audio... I record into a lot of my tracks using
synths just from an audio interface. I do like still using bits of samples but
don’t call me out on it online, please. [laughs] Just little beats but I think it’s for
integrity. Obviously, a lot of times now I don’t try to sample things that
I’ll get in trouble for. I usually try to re-sing it how someone else re-sings
something, especially if I use pitched vocals, just because, you know... Yeah, I still use a lot of
MIDI. As long as Ableton won’t crash I usually like to keep it MIDI. I mean, I
can freeze tracks as well just to lower the amount of pressure it puts on my
hard drive, but it’s really basic, I’m not using anything too crazy. As far as
a lot of VSTs I like to use, Massive is a big one. I think I layered my kicks
for those.
[music continues]
For something like with programming basslines, sometimes I’ll choose to use
analog synths like a Moog or something like that, like Little Phatty or Sub
Phatty. Sometimes it’s just easier for me to use a VST [Virtual Studio Technology] because I’m traveling a
lot when I make tracks and then once I get home I’m cool with it. I don’t feel
the need to be super nerdy and elitist and have to rerecord everything with a
synth, I think. You can accomplish a lot just using VSTs. An example here, one
line of the bass is more for sub and the second line is more for punch. Yeah,
I mean, I don’t know what else I could tell you guys. When I program drums,
another thing is I like to tap them in. One component of my music that I think
is really strong is to swing the drums a little bit, and that’s all according
to feelings, so however you like to swing your drums or if you like to keep
your drums really quantized. I think even if you make other types of
electronic music like house or techno, it still lends itself to have a human
element to how you program your drums. I mean, that’s just my opinion, but it’s a cool
way to have an interesting sound signature to your music.
Emma Warren
OK, that’s a pretty thorough breakdown of what one track and I guess if
anyone’s got any more specific questions then you can save them up and ask at
the end. You just mentioned something about a human touch; I wondered if we
could talk a bit about some of the humans that you worked with on the record.
Also, what makes a good collaboration for you?
TOKiMONSTA 
I guess on this record, I worked with three different people. It was Arama, who
is an amazing singer, and another guy named Anderson .Paak and a third, lovely
woman named Joyce Wrice. All of three who are not super well known yet. I
think they have the potential to become great and for me to work with someone,
I don’t need them to be famous. I don’t care about that stuff. I care about
talents, and how well we work together and how much I admire them for what they
are regardless of if they’re making it or they’re songwriting for big artists.
All that stuff is meaningless to me. As long as I understand the person, we
get along, and they understand me too, that’s really important. As far as a lot
of these collaborations with the track with Arama, I had never met her in
person. The first time I met her was last week in New York and then we made
this track maybe two or three months ago. We live in a modern age where it’s
not important to actually meet the person in person. You can build strong
bonds with people. You can become someone’s best friend just through the
internet and I think that’s amazing and it’s great that it’s not as
stigmatized because a while ago it was weird to be like, “I have this friend I
met online,” kind of creepy...
Emma Warren
You mean you don’t really know them.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yeah, exactly. Now, I can make full songs with people I’ve never met in person
and she was lovely when I met her. That was great. Even just communicating via
email and Dropbox and these things, we were able to work on a song that was
really collaborative.
Emma Warren
You said that you want people who sound great. I guess we all hear greatness
in different ways, don’t we? Do you know what it is about someone’s vocal
quality that sounds great to you?
TOKiMONSTA 
I have no idea. Generally, if I hear someone’s work and it resonates with me,
that’s all it takes. I don’t think I can quantify or list down qualities of
this is what sounds great to me because it can change. I work with so many
different types of people and I don’t know one characteristic that’s common
between all of them.
Emma Warren
Anderson .Paak is someone you mentioned and someone that you’re producing as
well, as an artist. What is it about him that you like?
TOKiMONSTA 
He’s amazing. I don’t even know. I’ve worked with so many people and they’re
all amazing in their own way, but I don’t know what it is, he’s like a genius
to me. I’ve seen him song-write, I’ve written tons of songs with him already
and I can’t explain what it is. I feel like somehow everyone has overlooked
him to a certain point. Now he’s getting a lot more attention but he’s an
amazing vocalist, great singer, a writer, he can rap but I think the quality
maybe that is common between all the people I like to work with is that
they’re soulful. They have a heart. Their music isn’t cold. There’s something
about the quality that’s very authentic and meaningful.
Emma Warren
Can we hear something from him?
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
Where did you guys meet by the way?
TOKiMONSTA 
We met through a mutual friend. His name is Dumbfoundead and Anderson .Paak has
been living in LA for quite a while and he recently changed his name. His name
before was Breezy Lovejoy. Yeah, I guess he decided to rebrand and rename or
start a new path, but yeah, I just think he’s great.
(music: TOKiMONSTA feat. Anderson .Paak – “Realla” / applause) 
Emma Warren
When will we be hearing that lovely voice again?
TOKiMONSTA 
Soon. Not sure yet. Not good with dates but we’re working on stuff actively.
Emma Warren
Any little sneak tasters, or ideas of what will be coming?
TOKiMONSTA 
Not yet. [laughs]
Emma Warren
OK, we’re not going to get anything else out of her right now. Maybe later
we can ask for a little listen. I wanted to ask you about another couple of
collaborations that you’ve had or will be having and the first really was with
Sakamoto.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
Can you tell us what the collaboration was and how it came about?
TOKiMONSTA 
I’ve collaborated with him on a couple of occasions. I’m not sure which one
you’re referring to.
Emma Warren
I was actually talking about the one where the track that he was introduced to
you by Shing02.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
Where they talk about Fukushima.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes. I had met Ryuichi Sakamoto beforehand. He’s a really amazing musician and
that he’s always been on the forefront of technology. He’s always been about
thinking forward and not backwards. He actually discovered my music through
Shingo and contacted me directly a long time ago on MySpace, [laughter] if you want to
gauge exactly in terms of date. At first I was like, “I don’t know who this…”
I think he had a pseudonym or something else and I’m like, “I don’t know who
this dude is.” Then later on Shing02 was, “Ryuichi Sakamoto was trying to
contact you and let you know...” I was like, “Wow, that’s really cool.” Since
then I’ve been able to speak with him and I can say he’s someone that is
almost a friend of mine, someone I look up to very dearly. Me, Shingo and
Ryuichi Sakamoto worked on a track together. They asked me to help contribute
and it was about the Fukushima nuclear power plants and I don’t speak Japanese
that well so I didn’t really understand the words but I understand how
powerful it is. They’ve both been on the forefront against nuclear power.
Everyone has their own opinion on such matters but what they’re going for
really meant a lot to me and the way that they explained it to me as well as
just in general how they view our future. And he just approached me about
contributing to the instrumental and to the beat, and originally it was just
found sounds and I was able to produce it out.
Emma Warren
When you say you’re almost friends, I suppose, or friends of some kind; what
kind of things would you to talk about?
TOKiMONSTA 
I guess a lot of things. It was interesting. Once I was sitting in a cafe with
him in New York and he was asking me about the musical climate. It’s
different, when his career started people bought music. I don’t know when the
last time you guys bought music was but it’s been a while for me. I mean, I
buy music but it’s not like how people used to. This was maybe three years ago
or something, he was asking me about that and I will say yeah, a musician’s
way of subsisting now is not like how it used to be. You couldn’t make a lot
of money or you could before survive on record sales. Now, especially as an
independent artist, I think most of my income honestly comes from touring and
doing all these other things. Not a significant amount comes from music, that’s
why, in my opinion, I almost just want people to hear the music more then to
pay, though it’s cool if you guys pay, I don’t mind that either. Yeah, that was
really interesting, the generational perception of music and living off music
and music business. I’m sure he feels that more now because he’s been
releasing on such cool labels like Ghostly and all these things. Yeah, I mean
that was something that I felt was very insightful in terms of him actually
having a different grasp on that than I did because I fully know what it’s
like to make music in this generation.
Emma Warren
What’s the other collaboration you’ve done with him then?
TOKiMONSTA 
I have a track on my recent record and I named the track after him and I used
some pieces of piano from him and – I asked him, I didn’t like, sample-jack him, you can’t
steal from your friend – I asked him if it was okay and I really hope one day
to grow up and be a musician like him, that’s still very rooted in classical
thoughts but so future-minded. It sounds weird to say that but respectful of
change. And a lot of people from older generations are a little resistant to
change, not everyone, but I hope that I always stay supportive of change, good
change, bad change, everything. I can show a little bit of that track.
Emma Warren
Yes, please.
TOKiMONSTA 
Or iTunes can quit. Hold on.
(music: TOKiMONSTA – “Sakamoto’s Spring”)
Yeah, I don’t want to bore you guys by playing everything out. That was great,
so I sampled those first few chords from him or he played those first few
chords, and then all the other pieces of piano are actually from me so I was
able to take the root chords and basically build whole songs around them. It’s
really fun to be able to do stuff like that, and to build songs, like re-
appropriating, or appropriating songs into new songs.
Emma Warren
I guess building on songs.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yeah, building, exactly.
Emma Warren 
You play piano. You play piano, properly, and obviously, you use the piano as an
instrument, as a source for your music but if you’re just sitting in front a
piano to play for yourself, what do you like to play?
TOKiMONSTA 
I’ll say this. I’ve taken piano for a very long time. When I was younger I
took lessons for, I don’t know, ten years. I never amounted to being much of a
pianist in my opinion. Other people who have taken piano for that length of
time could go on to become proper pianists, but the way that I used to work with
pieces when I was younger is that I would only play parts of pieces that I
liked. [laughter] Why did I have to play the whole song if I didn’t like the whole song?
The running joke in my family was that I couldn’t play the piano, is that I
couldn’t play an entire piece from start to finish. I had to explain to them
that I didn’t want to because I didn’t like the whole song so I didn’t have to
play it. Now I call that classical sampling; I basically only played the parts
that I like and I think that really was an early indicator of the kind of
musician I would become. I only want to take the best parts. Who wants to play
the sh---y parts? No one. Well no, people do but… Sorry. A whole piano piece
is beautiful but then I was eight and I had the attention span of a goldfish
and I didn’t want to play stuff that I didn’t have fun playing and that was
what was important to me with the piano. I wanted to have fun. I didn’t want
it to be structured. I understand that I have really poor posture and I know
piano it’s really good to have posture. I didn’t care about any of that stuff.
Emma Warren
Just out of interest, what are the best parts?
TOKiMONSTA 
The parts I had the most fun playing. The ones that sounded the best but also
when I think about it now, I think the pieces I like the most were rhythmic.
They had a lot of staccato notes or had some elements that were really fun to
play. I mean, haven’t played the piano, sat down and read a piece of music for
quite a while, but yeah, if I look back at it, those were the best for me.
Emma Warren
Any pieces of music in particular that come to mind? I know I’m asking you to
cast your mind back a very long way.
TOKiMONSTA 
[laughs] Oh, crap. Let’s see. I don’t know. I really can’t think. I’d have to Google it and find
it, but I mean, even playing something like “Für Elise” the reason why it’s fun to
play, or the reason why I like to play it, is because it was fun to play and
there were so many ways that you can express yourself without being overly
complicated. I have really clumsy fingers so if I try to play Chopin or
something it turns into a jumbled little mess. I literally haven’t sat down at
the piano for a while and even then, most of the piano pieces were in a
language I did not speak and so I don’t remember.
Emma Warren 
OK, then, so…
TOKiMONSTA 
Sorry.
Emma Warren
No, no, no. Don’t apologize because that’s... Of course, that’s fine. What I
wonder though is that musicality which you’ve had through your lessons as a
kid, obviously, it stays with you in some shape or form and I wondered what
you got from knowing some of that basic stuff. How did that musicality show
through in what you do now?
TOKiMONSTA 
Basically, piano helped me learn how to build melodies. I think if I hadn’t
taken piano I wouldn’t know how to build chords in the background like a lead
melody on top and strings and horns, and... I like the orchestral quality of
classical music and how things build and tell a story. That’s something that I
find is very prominent in my music. I always want the ending to be very grand
and powerful, and a lot of classical pieces have that, they have the storyline.
It will build and becomes suspenseful or something. It will reach its apex and
then calm down and then reach its apex again and these things I think are very
important. That’s why I don’t have too many songs of mine that are just loops.
It’s a popular quality or common quality of a lot of beat makers, quote unquote, but I just
always have to do something, it has to build in some way that is… I can build
songs that are linear but in a lot of ways I like stories that touch back to
earlier parts of the song.
Emma Warren
You like the orchestral sweep.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
I was quite intrigued by the fact that you use a violin but not necessarily in
a straightforward way, that you use it to make sounds.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
How are you making sounds from the violin in your studio?
TOKiMONSTA 
I don’t know how to play the violin and I tried once and it’s very hard. If I
can play one note on key and then another note on key and another note I’ll
just layer them all three together and create my own symphonic sound. That’s a
good quality about being a producer, you just cut and patch and tape things
together and it sounds kind of half decent. The great thing about violin or any string
instruments is that you can get so many strange sounds out of it as well, so
just plucking it and distorting it or using the bow in a way you’re not
supposed to, I find that it’s intriguing. Real instruments are really
intriguing, the ways you can use them in a non-traditional way.
Emma Warren
A sort of cool thing, actually recently, where this band was playing and they
were like a strange folk band and the violinist was playing but then the
percussionist was standing at the neck of the violin and playing the neck of
the violin to get beats out of it. Yeah, it was pretty cool. Apparently, most
violin players are pretty precious about their instruments though so this must have been quite cool.
TOKiMONSTA 
Exactly. The violin I have right now is technically not mine so I hope my
friend never sees this and knows that I’ve been playing. When she gets it back
it will still look normal. I’ll tune it or something.
Emma Warren
We talked about a collaboration that you’ve done in the past and then spoken
about this but I wondered if we could talk about a collaboration that’s coming
up, one with Kelly Rowland.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes. I have a project coming out with Kelly Rowland, also from Destiny’s
Child, also sounds really random, right? I guess me being so, I don’t like
using the term underground, but I’m so below the surface in a lot of ways and
even though I think I’ve grown over the years I still consider myself not an
above-the-surface kind of artist. The way I perceive these big pop acts is
that they don’t know about us, they don’t listen to music. They only listen to
what they make or what the studio tells them to listen to. There’s so many
misconceptions and that’s not true. She loves music. She loves all sorts of
music. She loves my music and I was like, “Wow! That is really unexpected,”
and music from my peers and music that even I don’t know about.
Emma Warren
Like who?
TOKiMONSTA 
She was working on a track with Giorgio Moroder. That’s
not an example of someone I don’t know but then that was still an example of
someone I was very surprised by. I was like, “Really? That’s kind of tight.” I
think that her taste in music is more sophisticated than I would have thought
because there’s only so much that we know. We think we know so much about
these people via TMZ or Us magazine or whatever your national equivalent to
trashy magazines are. But, I still respect her. I mean, I grew up listening to
Destiny’s Child. They’re awesome. It’s the thing. They’re just all super
talented and she’s someone I always followed. She was my favorite. Everyone
likes Beyoncé, I like Kelly Rowland, it’s one of those things. Yeah, we
started working on some tracks together and... It was just amazing, for her to
listen to my stuff and be like, “I want us to make a track to this one beat,”
and it’s one of my most esoteric strange beats. I’m like, “How do you want to
do this?” but we’ll make it happen.
Emma Warren
So when you’re working with Kelly, where does that happen?
TOKiMONSTA 
In the studio. It’s kind of interesting; I’m only used to producing at home. I
can’t produce in big studios. I can tweak mixes, I can cut vocals, those type
of things but I kinda have to work from home. I usually bring a lot of beats in
advance so I’ll have ten tracks and be like, “Any of these speak to you, let me
know. We can start writing to these songs.” She’ll go through and listen and,
of course, I’ll make edits to the beats. They’re all open. When I anticipate
vocals on tracks I’ll leave them a little bare which is a little difficult for
me because I’m used to making tracks with just so much stuff in them but yeah,
I’ll just have all these songs. A lot of these tracks I made just for this
project. I didn’t change anything for her, but I just made new tracks. That’s
the biggest thing, too, is I didn’t want to sacrifice my artistic integrity
just because I was working with some big pop star or something like that and
she’s respectful of that too. She worked with me because she knows what kind
of music I make and yeah.
Emma Warren
I guess she wouldn’t want you to come as something different because what she
wants is what you’ve got.
TOKiMONSTA 
You never know. I could be the next... I don’t want to say anything.
Emma Warren
It’s interesting because that ability to totally be in the realm that you’re
in but also be very comfortable working on a bigger level also applies to your
live self as well. I wondered if you could tell us how different you might
approach a kind of a club show to something where you’re on a much bigger
stage with much bigger names.
TOKiMONSTA 
I try not to really change my set too much. I figure that if I’m on some kind
of bill, people are there to see me, and all I have to offer. Though if I’m
playing, let’s say, at a quote-unquote EDM stage, these things are very conflicting towards
me because I’m like, “I don’t know how I can do this,” but it’s weird how that
whole realm has shifted and become wider. What was once... I don’t like that phrase, I
definitely don’t think I qualify that, even from like a press perspective, but
it’s sort of widened. Now the stuff that I make usually can still make people
excited on the stage while I’m playing next to someone like Skrillex or Diplo
or whatever and that’s been fortunate. Yeah, when I play own club shows I’m
definitely going to play stuff I think is going to cater to those people that
came to this small intimate show just to see me.
Emma Warren
Do you have to prepare differently for one of those shows? Do you bring
different kit with you?
TOKiMONSTA 
Not really. When I play I use Ableton and I always have a skeleton so these
tracks I know I’m always going to play, usually stuff of my own. I started
filling the meat in between on the fly, so the meat changes when I play.
Larger show, I’ll play certain other songs versus other songs I’ll play for a
club show. I try to make the bulk of my set consistent through both because I
don’t want to be wishy washy. I might feel like a daytime set versus a
nighttime set, I might play something different.
Emma Warren
If you were to cast your mind back to your very first shows... Can you remember
actually the first show you did?
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes. It was really bad. Where was it? I was so nervous. I think it was… OK,
there’s two. I don’t know which one was first but I remember playing in a
weird small venue and I had to set up all my gear on top of turntables and
play this wonky set where I was like playing on the side. I didn’t really know
how to use my controller, because I bought a controller just to use with
[Ableton] Live, and I’m so used to just being a producer that I didn’t know
what I was doing. A couple songs would stop and then I was like, “Oh crap. The
song stopped.” No one really cared. It was okay. I think people were fairly
forgiving, or whatever. But things like that happen now too but when
something stops I know how to play it off like, “Ooh, yeah, I did that on
purpose.” [laughter] Back then when something stops, it was more like, “Oh sh--, what did
I do?” And everyone knows that I really messed up and I’d be like, “Oh no,
crap.” But I learn from it and I appreciate all those moments. It’s definitely
also taught me to be more resilient and tougher, because things happen when you
play live, and things happen when you perform. Even now, shows can be not what I
expect and now I don’t care, I just smile and be like, whatever.
Emma Warren
Where did you learn your performance chops like in LA, in the local clubs?
TOKiMONSTA 
Yeah, probably playing in places like Low End Theory,
which is a club in Los Angeles. Yeah, just having the opportunity to play
there and it’s a skill that’s developed over time and I’m still perfecting it.
I think live performing is very different to me than producing. But that’s why I
use Ableton because it’s easier for me to perform live because it’s more
similar to producing. I wasn’t an artist, I started off DJing and decided
to become a producer. I started off producing and learned how to DJ and
perform after.
Emma Warren
What kind of things have you finessed about how you perform over the years
between those early, nervous, panic gigs and what you’re doing now?
TOKiMONSTA 
I mostly learned to take the pressure off myself. I think before I used to
make myself so nervous before I perform that I just couldn’t concentrate on
what I should be doing. The more relaxed I am, the better I am at finessing
through my set, but also learning to be more active. If it’s just me in front
of a computer and a controller, that’s pretty boring. There’s not much to do.
I will be honest. It’s not that exciting, but I think there’s a charisma that’s
necessarily to perform live. I’m a very awkward person if you haven’t realized
that right now. I think just to be able to be more on free on stage. It’s not
being theatrical. I was never very theatrical. I wasn’t like a drama kid who
like took Shakespeare, I was too nervous to do that kind of stuff. Now I’ve
learned to become on stage and just disregard the crowd and just enjoy myself.
That sounds weird. Enjoy the act of just playing music for myself. If everyone
in the audience is happy, they’re happy with me, and if they’re not, at least
I’m still having fun.
Emma Warren
I guess moving away from live a little bit and talking a bit about the way you
release your music. I thought it was interesting that was one of the tracks
from Desiderium, you just put it out without telling anybody. The Twitter
message was like, “Oh, everyone’s going to be annoyed about this but it’s my
music and I don’t care. It’s just I’m going to put something out.” How
important it is for you to be in control of the timing of your releases?
TOKiMONSTA 
I think it’s fairly important. I’ve come to this point now where,
traditionally when you release an album with a label they need lead-in time.
So that means time for them to get the proper press, to make sure they have
distributors, and to get your billboard up, or make sure they… All these things
that they think are really important but in my mind, the most important thing
is the music, and in the age that we live in now, when’s the next time you
guys are going to pick up a magazine and judge an album on the magazine? Buy
the album because the magazine said it was good. I’m pretty sure you guys will
all go... Maybe you’ll see the article but you guys will go online and listen to
it and then decide for yourself if you guys like it. For me, I think that
getting the music out there is more important. Also, as a musician like in the
past, by the time my album comes out, I’m already past it. I’m already like,
“Uh, I’m not really like that proud of it now because now I’m doing this new
stuff and I think this new stuff is way better than the old stuff.” Not to say
I don’t appreciate my old work but with me being able to control how I release
my music I can put it out as soon as I think it should come out. Like it’s
relevant now, I want it to come out now. I don’t want my music to come out six
months from now when I don’t think it’s relevant anymore, because six months
from now all the things I did that I thought were really cutting-edge or
really interesting, it won’t be the same way. It won’t have that impact. I’m
also very impatient, and I just hate that idea where I put out an album and the
songs I’m making at the time when the album releases I think is more advanced
than the album itself and I have to go and live with this old piece of work
that I did.
Emma Warren
How kind of fully indie or not are you now?
TOKiMONSTA 
I think I’m more indie than I’ve ever been since I released my own record and
I’ve never actually done that before but at the same time my reach is the
furthest it’s ever been. These labels are kind of silly now, saying you’re
indie, you’re underground or mainstream or pop, because pop used to describe a
sound but pop also means popular but now you have indie artists that are
paving the way in super-pop music, but it’s still indie. And then, what’s indie
if it’s not underground but it’s on a label? But indie labels are now also
bigger than they were before. It’s contrived and annoying so I’m just like,
“I’m just a musician that makes music in the middle ground,” I don’t know.
Emma Warren
Is this something that you think you’ll be doing more of just, releasing stuff
yourself, it’s Young Art [Records] isn’t it, your label? 
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
Is that the kind of route for you for the next little while?
TOKiMONSTA 
Not necessarily, actually. I’ve created the label as a platform for artists
that I believe in, and I want to be really active on my label. You know, I don’t want to
have my label but then myself release on other labels. I think that I want to
pave the way for my artists that I choose. It’s not a money-making venture at
all. I just really want people to hear music and music that I believe in and
hopefully other people believe in as well. If I feel like I want to release a
new EP on Brainfeeder I can just hit up Flying  Lotus, it’d be like,
“Do you want to release this?” He’ll be like, “Yeah, cool, whatever,” and I’ll
release it. I think a lot of this label stuff is just about, you know, if I make an
album for Brainfeeder again, it’s going to have a sound that I think fits them
well and if I do it on another label... I mean it’s all weird and stuff, but
yeah. Just release on whoever I want to as long as I have creative control.
Emma Warren
I guess in the time that we’ve got now, there’s lots of stuff we’re not going
to be able to talk about and you guys can ask questions when you want, when
it’s time I guess... Whenever you want, jump in! But I did want to ask you about, because you had a brief period
working for a video game company.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
What were you doing with them?
TOKiMONSTA 
When I was working at the video game company, I was working in production and
business development. I just sat in the office and helped all the producers of
the video games with stuff. I was more active on that side than with the
licensing side. But I got to sit down and play video games for fun. That
wasn’t actually a part of my job, it’s something I was able to do. [laughter] But
yeah, I got to see how video games are made from a producer side, not a
developer side, and that was pretty cool. It’s also really stressful to be a
video game producer is what I’ve also learned.
Emma Warren 
Were you involved in the music at all for, was it Mortal Kombat?
TOKiMONSTA 
I wasn’t actually that involved in the music side though I had an appreciation
and everyone who worked on the office on that side was such a big fan of
music. I even had a co-worker from my former company play guitar on my EP for
Brainfeeder so we all just had this really deep love for music. We’d used our
company file-sharing thing to drop music into each other’s folders. They would
tell me all about like the guy who developed the music for Final Fantasy, how
he was just a guy that worked at the company, he ended up scoring all the
video games. It’s pretty neat.
Emma Warren
I guess, actually something else that would be nice to ask you about then is
the kind of anime composers or music for anime. It feels like the people that
made the music for video games are getting the recognition that they deserve
now to some extent. But I wondered whether or not anime music had influenced
what you did or if you had any thoughts about those kind of composers, any
particular favorites maybe?
TOKiMONSTA 
It’s interesting the idea of anime culture, anime music because now it’s so
much more mainstream than it was. Because I’m Asian-American, it’s kind of
more instilled, it’s very normal to watch anime, growing up it’s on TV. But
then from a Western perspective it was always this “Otaku” [geeky], like different, like
all the anime kids were like their own thing. They’d go to anime expo, and yet
now everyone enjoys anime. You don’t have to be this kid that dresses up in
cosplay. People have an appreciation for watching, I don’t know, whatever it
might be that you’re into. There’s just so many great ones. As well as anime
as a film genre which, is different than it as a cartoon. But, now I see
producers that are adopting anime music as a style, like a stylistic quality
that they really enjoy. Like Anamanaguchi, these people that take eight-bit sounds
from video games and anime, but obviously they’re composing completely
original music with that element involved. It’s cool. I love it. I’m a big
nerd so I think it’s amazing to hear this kind of music become more
mainstream, the sort of “Kawaii” [cute] nature of video game and anime music; but then,
it also crosses over to the other side, because with someone like Shing02 who
worked with Nujabes, they brought hip-hop into Samurai Champloo which was a
very prominent anime here in Japan. It kind of goes both way like anime music
is building outside of being super sparkly and bubbly and then you have the
outside music becoming more of that. People like Kyary Pamyu Pamyu who’s like
crazy from an art perspective but very J-pop at the same time, it’s really
cool how music is becoming more global without intending to be. It’s just
becoming that way.
Emma Warren
I guess just by the nature of things.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Emma Warren
It’s happening.
TOKiMONSTA 
Is that internet? I don’t know.
Emma Warren
That internet. OK, I guess one final thing before we open up to you guys, is
there anything that you’ve got coming up that you could tell us about or maybe
some music that you could play or some stuff that’s nearly with us?
TOKiMONSTA 
The only thing that I’m working on right now that’s coming up soon is a
project for Gavin Turek and she’s a wonderful singer who had a couple of
tracks on my Creature Dreams EP on Brainfeeder and so I’ll be releasing her
on Young Art as well. I do have a track, but it’s not mixed, and it’s with her on it, but we’ll see.
Hopefully, you guys don’t mind that it sounds a little rough.
(music: Gavin Turek – unknown)
[applause]
Yeah, that’s really rough but I think you guys get the idea.
Emma Warren
Most definitely. Questions from the floor, where’s the microphone, who’s got
the first question?
Audience Member  
Hello.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes.
Audience Member  
Thank you so much for this talk. I wanted to hear like one of the first tracks
you’ve made of your own. There was this like very floating pads in the
background. I just wanted to know if you could say a bit about how like you
got to that song, like what reverb were you using?
TOKiMONSTA 
Ah yes, that one’s a good one. It’s like the basic, basic most default sound on
Absynth [music production software]. I didn’t really have to do anything. I do like using reverb with a
very long decay and, well, I guess a long decay but not too long. Make sure
you EQ out like the bottom, like the low end of the EQ and the high end. Also
panning is really important but it, I mean, it doesn’t take that long to find
a sound that you like. It’s just about finding it, right? You can get the same
sound on a Nord [synth] if you want to, I just found it on Absynth. Literally, when
you open the VST, that’s the sound that pops out. I always think it’s really
silly when people overcomplicate patches. Another great though is to press
mutate, so if you don’t want to just go for the regular pad-like default songs
that they have, Absynth has a great mutate button that will just mutate the
sound until it turns into some weird, crazy thing. Sometimes it will just end
up mutating into nothing, but it’s a cool feature to use.
Audience Member  
Were you singing that yourself?
TOKiMONSTA 
Singing on that track?
Audience Member  
Yeah, like the pad, it sounds like it’s a vocal sample.
TOKiMONSTA 
Wait, wait. Are you talking about the very first track I made or I showed you
guys?
Audience Member  
It’s like really floating, in the background it has this very behind something
more upfront vocal stuff.
TOKiMONSTA 
Did it have the percussion in it? Is that the one that have like the East
Asian percussion thing?
Audience Member  
Maybe.
TOKiMONSTA 
Here, wait. I’ll be able to explain it better if I know what song you’re
talking about? Was it this one or that one?
[music]
Audience Member  
No.
TOKiMONSTA 
No, OK. Then disregard everything I just said because it wasn’t relevant to
the song that I thought you’re talking about. Were you talking about the one
where I was singing?
Audience Member  
Yeah, I think so.
TOKiMONSTA 
Yeah. This one? Is it that one?
[music]
Audience Member  
Yes.
TOKiMONSTA 
OK, there we go. Yeah, the background of that is vocals. Just vocals with a
long decay, just harmonized on top of each other. It’s always good to double or
triple vocals, even the harmonies too, it makes for a very thick sound.
Especially if you’re going to use it textually like that in the background
because you’re referring to like the howling sort of sound, right?
Audience Member  
What reverb were you using?
TOKiMONSTA 
That one, I was either using... It’s like a Max patch, they have a reverb that comes in there, like
the pack that comes with it, or it’s a convolution reverb, or it’s just the
Ableton reverb. Which everyone, if you guys use that, make sure you set it,
set the quality to high because everyone always leaves it on eco and it sounds
like crap. So, yeah.
Audience Member  
Thank you.
Emma Warren
OK, where’s the microphone going? To the front.
Audience Member  
I was just wondering when you work with vocalists, do you write with them?
TOKiMONSTA 
Yes and no, it depends. Some of them I’ll write it with like the track I just
showed with Gavin, I sat down and helped to write it.
Audience Member  
The last one?
TOKiMONSTA 
Yeah, the last one I played before we went into questions. I don’t like
stepping on a vocalist’s toes. One quality I really admire from vocalists is
their ability to write, but sometimes I have a track on my new album where I
wrote the entire thing and someone else sang it. Because that’s fun for me to
be able to sort of sing vicariously through someone else who can sing, because
I can’t sing. But yeah, sometimes when I’m with singers I’ll just help them
maybe format the song or help build harmonies with them, but I don’t try to
tell them how to write a poem. I’ll let them do their thing.
Audience Member  
Not even as much for the lyrics but for the vocal melodies?
TOKiMONSTA 
Vocal melodies, it kind of depends on the person. Some people are really
touchy so I just know not to. Other ones I’ll bring in a suggestion and be
like, “Oh, it’s starting to sound repetitive, what about if we change the
melody at the end, at the turnaround so the influx is higher or the note goes
up at the end or down?” It’s very varying levels, because some people I will
contribute a lot, like most of the songs is written by me, and they just say,
“Maybe we should do something here or there.” Sometimes they write the
majority and then I’ll chime in every now and then. Sometimes it’s very 50/50.
I like that process though, just knowing how much to work on something with
someone and how much you want them to shine and let them do their own thing.
Audience Member  
Also just one other question: With the Kelly Rowland track, were you all
thinking about her image when you were making the song? It reminded me of
“Motivation,” how it’s like super sexy, and I think that’s something she does
a lot. Were you thinking about that or did it just happen?
TOKiMONSTA 
We weren’t really thinking about that. I think Anderson wanted to write about
that. I think as a guy he was explaining to me that he likes to write about
things that he thinks about a lot and so I guess as a guy he just thinks about
sex a lot, I don’t know.
[laughter]
Audience Member  
He wasn’t even writing it from her perspective.
TOKiMONSTA 
I mean, he had to write it a little bit from her perspective because he’s a
dude and he doesn’t want to write it like he’s a guy because then it just
won’t make sense from a girl. In the writing process for her, I really
encouraged making the song sound less specific. I wanted it to sound like it’s
from her, but I wanted it to sound like it applies to anyone.
Audience Member  
Totally.
TOKiMONSTA 
That track is one that we wrote to, and it’s also one that she liked, because we
wrote a bunch of tracks and she really liked it.
Audience Member  
It totally makes sense for her.
TOKiMONSTA 
She’s really into sexy stuff.
Audience Member  
You were talking about that technology allows you to work with people that are
from other places and stuff. I know it can be like Skype or anything but how’s
like the dynamics of working with some people? I don’t know if it’s a long
call but three hours talking and sharing the monitor or something like that,
can you tell us about the process of working to do something like that through
the internet?
TOKiMONSTA 
It kind of depends. With the track with Arama, I sent her an instrumental and
I just wanted to be like, “Why don’t you just do whatever you want on it, I’m
not going to give you direction,” because I wanted to feature her and by
featuring her I wanted her to make a song she was happy with not a song where
I’m like, “Why don’t you make it sound like this song and this song combined
and try not to sing like yourself because I don’t like how you sound.” I don’t
collaborate with people for those reasons. I sent her the track first and she
recorded some vocals and then sent them back to me, and I’m like, “Oh yeah,
these are cool. Maybe we should try doing this or that?” Or, “I think this
part should be the hook and then we should move the verse around.” It’s
actually really simple with her, because she sent me a track that I was almost
100% on, and I made some changes and then it came back 100%. With production it’s a little different, in that I’ll just do a collect-all and save it to Dropbox so me and the other person would be able to
collaborate on the production together and we can just chat about it online
and be like, “Oh, I’m going to go in and change this, if that’s okay with
you.” Maybe I’ll write a synth line and the other person is like, “Mm, I think
I want to change the sound.” So they’ll keep mine, just in case we want to stick
with that idea, and write something on top, and we’ll edit, but I think at some
point it’s helpful to sit down with someone to work on stuff. But yeah, I
don’t know. With vocalists, I’m really good as just letting them do... Express
themselves as they like.
Audience Member  
Hi. Sorry, I got another technical question for you. I noticed in your
productions a lot of times that are really earthy, sort of organic feel to
them. I know you already elaborated a bit on swing, but specifically, like for
example on your “2 On” remix when the bass first comes in and stuff, a really
nice earthy feeling, so can you elaborate a bit on how you do that?
TOKiMONSTA 
The bassline as in the sound or the rhythm?
Audience Member  
Definitely from the sound design.
TOKiMONSTA 
OK. I struggled with that so, so, so, so much because the bassline was so
aggressive and I had to use, like... On the master I really had to control the
bass with a multi-band compression. I think we used the Waves one but... That
song, everything is so overdriven. Like, the drums are super loud, the bass is
really loud, and... I had to do a lot of EQing and compressing and stuff to make
sure that it would come through in the mix without just hiding everything
else. As far as the sound itself... I’m not sure, which one did I use? I think I
used the microKORG on that and then from there, I recorded the microKORG into
Ableton. I used multi-band compression within there, the Ableton one. I don’t
think I used any low pass filters but using their… Sh--! I wish I had the session, I would
just show you but it’s on a different computer. I mean, as far as getting the
earthy sound, a lot of it is just like making things super thick because the
reality is if you want to program drums that sound like the MPC, you can’t
make it sound perfect but there are ways to manipulate the drums to sound like
that; especially depends on the sample you’re using. Like, if it comes from an
organic source, like I record the synth for that, a bass synth from an actual
synth then it will be easier to get that earthy sound but I don’t think it’s
necessary.
Audience Member  
Thank you. Sorry, I got…
TOKiMONSTA 
That’s okay.
Audience Member  
But to get that thickness with the bass do you utilize reverb at all?
TOKiMONSTA 
No, there’s no reverb on that one. Actually, with bass sounds, I try not to
use reverb because of the way it affects the rest of the mix unless you want
to EQ. Like, if you do a send reverb and then you decide to EQ the reverb on
the send channel that helps a lot too. I mean, I might do that sometimes; if I have a bass, it’s sort of
a traditional way, to just keep the bass in the center. If I have another bassline, but it’s more for texture like I’ll EQ all the low end and just have the highs of the some like... Let’s say it’s a buzzy bass synth, I’ll EQ out the bottom.
I might stereo pan the higher frequencies while keeping the subs still on the
center and that’s a really cool effect. I sometimes do that on kick drums too.
Audience Member  
It’s sub in mono and then stereo...
TOKiMONSTA 
Yeah.
Audience Member  
OK, cool.
TOKiMONSTA 
But it depends too, because if you plan to play some of this stuff out at the
club, most club speakers are summed, so then if you’re going to have phasing it
might be a problem. But there’s good VSTs to avoid that too.
Audience Member  
Thank you so much.
TOKiMONSTA 
No problem.
Emma Warren 
Any more questions? Or are we going to go for the informal ones afterwards. In
which case, I think we should all say a very big thank you to TOKiMONSTA. Thank
you.
[applause]
TOKiMONSTA 
Thank you guys.
