Tom Zé was born in 1936 in Bahia, Brazil. Now he's recognized worldwide as one of the godfathers of the tropicália musical and cultural movement. His psychedelic, subversive and inspiring songs have influenced and inspired musicians including Beck, Tortoise and David Byrne. 
In 2011 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, he traces the origins of this counter culture, the dictatorship in Brazil, his first albums, and gives a spontaneous recitation of the Madrid telephone directory.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Before we get started, let me do a kind of brief survey here. I’m assuming
there are fans of Brazilian music here, right? Sixties and ’70s Brazilian
music particularly. My man right here is looking at me and laughing because he
knows exactly what I’m talking about. How many fans here? OK, that’s good. I’m
assuming that we got some working knowledge on people like Caetano Veloso, Gilberto Gil, Gal Costa, Os Mutantes, bands like this? Working
knowledge, raise your hands. Oh, this is good. How about tropicália? How many people of you
have heard the term? Look at that, waving for attention over there.
Tom Zé 
Go ahead, go ahead.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
OK, the maestro said speak, so I speak. This is Tom Zé, so why don’t we start by giving him a warm round of applause, he came a long way to be here [applause]. The reason why I was asking all those questions is to get a sense of how deep this man is going to have to go. The difference between what he is going to be
talking about in regards to the scene which he helped build in Brazil, and
between that of Jagari Chanda, who spoke last week about the Zamrock scene
in Zambia is that there have been countless people who have offered their
opinions and philosophies about the scene that occurred in Brazil in the late
’60s and early ’70s, about his peers and about himself. In Jagari’s case there
was nothing, nobody had said anything about what he hand his compatriots had
done, it just didn’t even register as a blip on the radar. So, Jagari has
started from scratch. Whereas with this man he is actually going to be explaining to you
in his own words something about which you probably know something, but you
probably haven’t heard it from, as we say, the horse’s mouth. So rather than
me giving some sort of grand introduction, where I possibly add to errors that
were caused by people before me, I think it is more fitting that Tom is giving
an introduction himself, as to this movement which we all know under a variety
of different names, and for which we have different terms. Let him speak in his own
words about it and we start from there. He has had a tremendous career that
has stretched more than 40 years and he’s continuing as you have seen, for
those of you who had been at the performance, to innovate today. But before we
get into that, we have to have a basis for discussion. So, with that in mind I
think it is appropriate to ask him to begin this lecture.
Tom Zé 
I’m not quite sure about what
you would like to hear, about what I should talk about. I want to know a
little more about you guys, how old you are. Who among you are here from
Madrid? Nobody? Hah, very good. [Inaudible] She is a very good translator.
When I started working in the United States several magazines complained that
the translator understood me just as bad as the journalists themselves.
Yesterday, she was walking with me and she is a very good translator, a very
intelligent woman. Would you like to destroy a lie about the creation of
tropicalists, which was said to be a mixture of international rock, like the
Beatles and the Rolling Stones, and concretist poet from Brazil Oswald de Andrade? How many minutes did I just spend already? The tropicalists were not born in the
Aristotelian world as we all know.
[shows a piece of paper] It’s like a tropicalist nursery. They were educated
without knowing Aristotle, so he called themselves “Analphototeles,” an
analphabet [illiterate] Aristotle’s. A mixture of both terms. Have you ever
thought about acting under a new perspective, seeing the world from a new
cosmogony and interacting with it in a different way? Has anyone an experience
to share? Does someone know how to construct a civilization and work
culturally without Aristotle’s? 
The tropicalists were born from within a
distance of maximum 25 KM away from each other and were educated with
the cultural roots of Spain, and I call it a historical trap. When Spain was
invaded by the Arabs by the seventh century after the decay of Rome and the
whole Roman civilization, Europe was ruled by the Barbarians. But here in the
Iberian peninsula, the Portuguese and Spanish were living under the cultural
siege of the Arabs, which were the highest evaluated civilization at that time
when they invented the idea of zero. All civilizations up until that point
developed governmental budgets without the zero. All civilizations that lived
before the Arabs didn’t have the concept of zero. The Babylonians, the Greek,
Romans, and the Arabs brought the concept of zero. War has always been a
friend of science, it’s something curious. During a war the scientific life
gains a lot of input, just like you guys get a lot of input thanks to Red
Bull. [Turns to Egon, the interviewer] Please control the minutes, I [have
so much to say]. 
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Easier said than done. 
Tom Zé 
The Arabs were all over the Iberian peninsula, where we are now
and they were higher educated. They had a very developed medicine, a very
developed architecture. They were here for eight centuries, since the seventh
century until the 15th century. The last Arabian possession here was Granada
until 1492. After the Arabians had left, the Spanish and Portuguese barely had
time to cut the trees and make the boats to sail towards the renaissance in
the Americas. Now, what does this have to do with tropicalism? We are at the
nursery. The only thing a child has to do in a nursery is to be quiet as
possible – that’s what I have lived. Alain Resnais, a French director, has
this theory when we are from zero to two years old we have this mental board in which they record all of their experiences. It is the time in our lives where we
learn the most, where we get the most input of experiences. It’s like a chair of nurses who give input, because these were the origins of our thoughts. Our nurses, our maids, were our professors. During the
time the Arabs were here during the 12th and the 13th century the poets from Provence took a lot of influence from the Iberian culture. Ezra Pound said it’s impossible to treat
the poetry either in the United States as outside without mentioning the
poetry from Provence of that time, from the 11th and 12th century. Dante Alighieri used to say that Arnaut Daniel was the most
skilled worker of the language. After eight years of Arabian domain in Portuguese, when the Portuguese came to Brazil they were
more Arabic than Portuguese themselves. Now enter the tropicalists. There was a treaty
between Portugal and Spain when they were discovering America and traced a
line throughout the continent that east from this line it is going to be
Portuguese possession and west of it Spanish. It’s called [Treaty of] Tordesillas. The one who
can assure my theory is a Brazlian writer called Euclides da Cunha. When Brazil was about to be explored by the Portuguese, groups of people who explored the
countryside left from São Paulo, but they used to come back with everything they discovered. In this case, some of the explorers stayed at the region where I
was born and stayed, they didn’t go back to  São Paulo. The Portuguese got
together with the [Indians] and the [African people] for four centuries. The result was
this kind of skin [pulls up sleeve from his shirt], this kind of color and
this kind of way to think, this kind of… A lot of things. The principal
professors became our nurses because the people becomes illiterate. The people from the area where he was born, even though the
people were illiterate, they conserved the culture from their ancestors
orally. They were cultivated in the sense that they knew everything about
their history and their origins. 
Me, Caetano, Gil, Torquato Neto, we arrived at the first
school when we were eight years. We were already prepared with everything necessary to live in a culture. But then at this moment we started to become
interested in Aristotle’s, a thing I started to call “logical garbage.” We were strongly influenced by this Arabic culture, much more by the Aristotelian
logic. In fact, I wasn’t informed by the Aristotelian formation at all. When I went
to school at the age of eight, everything that I was being taught was coming in an
Aristotelian way. It could be a little bit strange, but with our Arabic way of thinking, there was a way that both ways of thinking matched. Whereas the Aristotelian way of thinking was very
precise, the Arabic way of thinking, there still was always something remaining there.
We all know that two and two is not four. The human brain doesn’t throw
anything away, it keeps everything. I thought that they were trying to throw
out the little rest that came from the Aristotelian way and the Arabic way of
thinking, but there was something that remained in the
hypothalamus. The rest, which is
called “logical garbage” remained and, when I went to university, there was
such a big amount of “logical garbage,” it couldn’t fit in the head anymore.
All this “logical garbage” came to the front cortex of the brain and we
started to think our vocabulary being based on this “logical garbage,” always
adding Aristotle’s and the Arabic way of thinking. We were trying to integrate a clique of very
well known singers, like Chico Buarque, Vinicius de Morais, Edu Lobo. When we had the opportunity
to present some of the songs to the public, including the leftists, we incorporated these two ways of
seeing life – Aristotle’s and Arabic culture. But many segments of the society,
including the political left wing, said it’s not good, it’s an alienation of
Brazilian culture and a copy of American culture. Now, I’m finishing, but from
now on you have to say that tropicália was not born from international rock
music, but it came from the “logical garbage.” [Applause] Now we are asking the help of Egon because our time is precious.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Man, when I first went to Brazil I didn’t go with any preconceived notion of
what I might find and like, and I found a bunch of music that I quite didn’t
like, actually. When I first discovered Tom Zé’s music, it was almost
impossible to categorize, because it was sold by the same record dealers who
were selling records that was known as this psychedelic Brazilian movement tropicalia,
whatever you call it. But it sounded totally different and it was very hard to
place. How many of you guys have heard music of Tom Zé’s first album [Grande Liquidação]? His first album was released in 1968 and it has just being reissued by Mr. Bongo Records in the UK. I think we can play a song because we heard quite a bit and then talk about where this
music actually came from. We already know that it came from the “logical garbage.” We already know that it didn’t come from the Beatles and the Rolling
Stones, but let’s hear a little bit. There are a couple of songs that are always
singled out as very influential songs from this record, one of it is called
“Parque Industrial.” Let’s play that because it is a very groovy and
influential song.
(music: Tom Zé – “Parque Industrial” / applause)
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Just a little excerpt from “Parque Industrial” from Tom Zé’s first album
Grande Liquidacao, 1968. He had mentioned that he is not from São Paulo. You
lived in São Paulo when you made this record, but you are originally from Bahia, right?
Tom Zé 
I was born in the middle of the state of Bahia, more or less in the
countryside, 25 KM away from all the members of tropicalism, just little villages.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
And this record was recorded for the Rozenblit [label], which was based in Recife, right?
Tom Zé 
The record company was from Recife but they had an office in São Paulo.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
The Rozenblit fabrication studio was based in Recife, it was a very important
company. Not only did they license American music and press it in Brazil, but
they also issued Jorge Ben
albums and would later issue some very amazing psychedelic rock records from
Recife and made possible music by people such as Lula Cortes and Zé Ramalho, Flaviola and their Solar imprint. Some
beautiful Brazlian music came about because of this independent factory that
was founded by Jose Rozenblit. That would partially explain why that record is such a difficult record to find.
Tom Zé 
One thing to remind is that at that time Brazil was resumed to Rio de Janeiro
and São Paulo, and the rest was nothing.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
And then here in the northern coastal city, there is this pressing plant, and
they are importing music, releasing records in Brazil, and making records like
this possible.
Tom Zé 
It was a very interesting adventure to have a company to be based there, not
only releasing American music, but also to be sensitive to everything that was
happening around them artistically.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
One thing I want to ask, because in the middle of this song you break into
this funk rhythm. There must have been some kind of influence of American and
European music, rhythms, etc.
Tom Zé 
That was the part that was really influenced by rock & roll. Especially an
influence by Brazilian guys like Roberto Carlos, translating
these rock songs into something we call “Ye Ye Ye” in Brazil. I am a very bad
composer, but the text is the
most important thing of everything. Because I am so bad, that is the reason I
am here. I am always going to the edges, where nobody wants to go and trying to
work it out.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Something very interesting I’d like to point out, and it comes from this idea
of the Aristotelian versus the Arabic influence you were talking about, the
“logical garbage” that was becoming so big in your brain, it’s almost as if
there was some sort of conflict that you were expressing in the music.
Because the music, especially on this first album, never stays in one groove
for too long. Everything is always changing. There is always some conflict in
the music, which I can only imagine comes from some sort of conflict you were
explaining earlier.
Tom Zé 
Maybe it’s possibly a very strong influence by Dorival Caymmi. We have bottled smiles;
everything you have to do is to warm it up and use it. When I was a child I
lived in a house that had a toilet, and I was delighted by this white beautiful
thing, even though it was used to do dirty things. And absolutely everything was made outside of Brazil. Every time I sat on the toilet I saw “Made
in England,” and you could say now that I spent all of my childhood shitting over
England [laughter]. When I came to São Paulo at that time, there was already kind of a stamp from the exportation. That meant Brazil was starting to
become an industrial country. There was a stamp “Made in Brazil” on export
coffee sacks; that’s where the “Made, made, made – made in Brazil” in that
song came from.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
There were also cultural exports happening from Brazil. Right up the street
where my wife and I were hanging out, we heard what I think was a rather
atrocious version of a Vinicius de Morais song, Frank Sinatra
doing “Girl From Ipanema,” and of course, bossa nova was exported and it was rather an explosive force. But two years prior to this record coming a very important
record was released all over the world, [Os Afro
Sambas] by Baden Powell and Vinicius de
Morais. This was a product directly of Brazil, which influenced the “thinking
musician” all over the world. Were you aware of this record and its influence?
Tom Zé 
Bossa nova was really something overwhelming. It’s a girlfriend with three pussies [laughter]. It was really delightful, you go out on the streets and you listen to this
marvelous songs. Sweetness. The reason was the complexity of the chords of
American jazz that influenced Brazilian music. But there is something
interesting also, after that boss nova started to influence jazz music.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
And this Os Afro Sambas album by Baden Powell and Vinicius de Morais, did you
know it when it came out?
Tom Zé 
All these people were geniuses for us. During our youths we were blessed by these composers.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
From my limited viewpoint, I look at the latter part of the 1960s in Brazil,
and I see a record like Os Afro Sambas and I see it had a tremendous impact.
Then in 1967 and 1968, there is a series of albums like Caetano Veloso’s first album, the
[Os Mutantes first album,
your first album, that all come out at the same time. Were you aware of these
albums? Of course, you were friends with Caetano, but were you aware of the
Mutantes, for example?
Tom Zé 
Yes, we were together. All of us, we heard everything that happened in Rio de
Janeiro through the radio. Vinicius, Baden Powell, Jobim, João Gilberto, we loved that music passionately.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
But these albums, like Caetano Veloso’s first album, the Os Mutantes’ first
album, these weren’t done in Rio, they were done in São Paulo, right?
Tom Zé 
Caetano’s first record was recorded in São Paulo, but the songs were made in
Bahia. In my case, I was studying something, which was very rare in Brazil… Very good teachers, although our state was very poor. Although the
quality of the teachers was very high at university, there was lots of poverty
and people used to starve. The director of the university was crazy but
marvelous. It was three schools, music, communication and dance and they
involved the best academic teachers from Europe in Bahia. In this time, ’58-’59, we were taught John Cage. We were taught by,
what’s the name of the Hungarian composer? I forgot. Naturally, the French
musique concréte composers.
All these people, we listened to their music, studied their works. My
education was a luxury in a very miserable country at that time. Caetano went
to the same school, even though I was the only one in the music school. But we
all had the same kind of formation, because we were all went to the same school and were influenced by the same ideas.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Caetano Veloso, Gilberto Gil, Tom Zé, we have a very romantic picture of the
tropicalista movement because of the record that came out called Tropicália: Panis et Circensis.
You were on the front cover with the Mutantes, Gilberto Gil and Caetano. [To
audience] Do you guys know this record I’m talking about? It’s a very
influential late ’60s Brazilian record. Can you talk to us a little bit about this record?
Tom Zé 
At that time, Gilberto Gil already knew the Mutantes. At that time they were
very young. At the same time Caetano was playing with an Argentinian band.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
What was the name of the band?
Tom Zé 
Audience member 
The Beat Boys.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
How about Gal Costa?
Tom Zé 
Excuse me. I would like to introduce you to musicians from my band. Nilza Maria, Renato Lellis is only 19 years, and Lauro Lellis is playing with me for 40 years already
and is the father of Renato. (Applause) But we were talking about the album Panis et
Circensis. The Latin from the album title is wrong, but the concrete poets said it was a minor error. It wasn’t important to us.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
We look at that record now as like a call to arms for this musical movement,
which we now call tropicália. But did you look at it as such when it was first
released?
Tom Zé 
I was quite aware that it was something different, something new and that it
could eventually be that arm that linked the Brazilian middle age with the
second industrial revolution, as I call it.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
We played a song earlier “Parque Industrial” and that was also done on this
album, Panis et Circensis, on which you participated and it was the sole Tom
Zé composition. Let’s play a moment of that.
(music: Tom Zé – “Tropicália Parque Industrial” / applause)
Tom Zé 
Rogerio Duprat made a very
patriotic arrangement to our ears, fooling around with the bands, of course.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Was this the only time you worked with Rogerio Duprat?
Tom Zé 
We didn’t work together. We are roughly the same age and we started from the
school.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
And, of course, Rogerio produced and arranged many of the influential records
from this time, including records by Gal Costa, Mutantes etc.
Tom Zé 
Normally, when you come from classical music and work with people within
popular music, there is no real understanding. It’s like breaking a leg.
Rogerio Duprat had this classical background but he was very skilled and
that’s why he succeeded in arranging popular music.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
You released your second album for another label – you no longer worked with
Rozenblit. Your second self-titled album, Tom Zé, the one with you on
the cover with a guitar, came out on RGE. Why didn’t you continue to work with Rozenblit?
Tom Zé 
The company crashed but they kept the rights over my songs, as if I was a
football player. Cazuza is a very
famous singer in Brazil, he’s already dead. He died very early of AIDS. But his
father, who was a producer, paid 2,500 Brazilian reals at that time to free me
from my contract.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Wow! OK, can you describe a little bit the transition between the first and the second
album? What changed between Grande Liquidacao and the Tom Zé album on RGE?
Tom Zé 
I was in a kind of crisis, because I knew at that time that I didn’t want to do
the popular music from my first album again. At the same time, I didn’t know
what to do and at the same time, João, the guy who freed me from my contract
with RGE, was putting pressure on me to work and do more music. To me, it’s a
crisis album and I don’t like to listen to it very often.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Wow. 1970, this is a crucial moment in what we referred to in the tropicália
movement. Caetano Veloso was recording in exile in London. Gilberto Gil was
going through the same sort of crisis. And we didn’t talk about the Brazilian military dictatorship, which started in 1964, nor of the influence of that on this
movement. But perhaps now is an appropriate time to discuss that.
Tom Zé 
Of course, the dictatorship was something that we didn’t appreciate. It was a
disturbance. But at the same time I don’t like to talk about it because for
many artists who had their songs censored, it was a kind of glamorized thing.
“You know, my music is being banned…” I’m not very fond of talking about it.
Many of my songs have been rejected, but I don’t like to talk about that
subject because of that kind of glamorous artists that would go, “I am
censored!”, and so on.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Let’s play a song from your second album. This song is called “Guindaste a
Rigor,” do you remember this?
Tom Zé 
[Enthusiastically] I like this song.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Thank God. Well, then let’s play that song.
(music: Tom Zé – “Guindaste a Rigor” / applause)
Tom Zé 
This is a very good moment to talk about how stupid the dictatorship in Brazil
really was. During the break of the song there is where everybody stops, and you can hear a beautiful burp of Coca-Cola and the woman who was working at the censorship
department, she said, “No burp. Please, this word we cannot use.” So, I said, “Your name,
Maria Joana, is also very similar to the word marijuana.” And she said, “You
are an educated guy, don’t put it in the song.” I replied, “Be patient, I am an educated
guy. But this word is no surprise for my audience.” At the end, and not to
discuss the whole afternoon about this, I just changed it from “burp” to “blow,” which in the end is a turn off.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
But you said you like the song, why do you like it particularly, especially
considering that you don’t listen to this album very often?
Tom Zé 
In this song there are a couple of interesting things. The people from the
interior department said that the notes, the “do-re-mi-fa-so-la-ti-do,” could
be words and therefore could be censored. The original lyrical idea was
[translates the wordplay that only works in Portuguese]: “Me, over you,
with no pause, merciless. Without making out on the sofa.” There is
something very beautiful in there. It seems like provincial poetry.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Oh, man, never know what to expect with you. I like this.
Tom Zé 
The people from the north of Brazil at that time didn’t have any sexual
education. There were no Playboy magazines, only magazines with dressed
women, which already would help a lot [laughter]. The folklore was the main thing responsible for preparing the children to
enter into adult life with the libido and everything that comes with adulthood. There is a Brazilian song that says that… [sings song in Portuguese] “Under a
balcony / The male clover was hurt / And the rose was torn apart.” If you are a
guy, you know nothing before the libido comes. But when the libido comes, the
person is like, “What?” [Laughs]
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
This record, when you look at the front cover, it appears like a very
conservative record. Especially given the records your peers you were working
with were putting out around at that time. Obviously, people like Gal Costa
were stepping up the game, talking about libido. Like the Gal Costa record
[India], you know what I’m speaking of? So have you broken from the scene of musicians with which you worked on the Panis et Circensis album by the time you released your
second album? Were you still friendly, were you still collaborating? Was there
some sort of fraternity?
Tom Zé 
We separated but we didn’t break up. At that time, all the tropicália
musicians started doing Brazilian popular music of the ’70s. At the same time,
I was ostracized, trying to work out what I’m doing today.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
You actually did only one record with RGE before signing with another label,
Continental. The third album, with your face on the front cover, I believe it was released as a self-titled album, was
reissued in the ’80s as Se O Caso E Chorar, and it had somewhat
of a funky song in the same vein of the one that we previously played, “Dor e Dor.” Do you remember this song and do you like it?
Tom Zé 
Do you have “Jimi Renda-se”?
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Jimi Hendrix?
Tom Zé 
“Jimi Renda-se”!
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
No.
Tom Zé 
Because the name of the guy Jimi Hendrix is “Jimi Renda-se” in Portuguese,
which is a game of words. Instead of Jimi Hendrix, if you say “renda-si” it means
“surrender, Jimi,” and that’s the name of one of my songs. But we could play
that one.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
The reason I ask about this song is because we started with your first album,
we only played one song from it, but it’s an album of great variety. Your
second album had a certain pop sensibility to it, that track we played was
very funk. But from your first Continental record, there is a track that
gained some notoriety over the past 40 years. [To audience] Have you guys
heard this song, “Dor e Dor”? Let’s play that song for a moment, “Ache and Ache.”
(music: Tom Zé – “Dor e Dor” / applause)
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
“Dor e Dor,” Tom Zé from his third album. That just elicits an applause any time you play it,
it’s great song. You said “ostracization,” I don’t understand how you could be
ostracized making beautiful funky pop music like that.
Tom Zé 
I suffer listening to the music.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Do you like that song?
Tom Zé 
I don’t like.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
OK, why? Can you explain it a little bit more?
Tom Zé 
Because I first made a song called “Jimi Renda-se,” it is the same music, but
some kind of subject is very different. At that time, the people coming up from the “middle
ages” of Brazilian music started to use a lot of English words without
criticism, such as “approach” and “briefing” in the advertisement world. And I
like the song because it is a joke, mixing with other languages like French, English, making a Brazilian approach to these languages. Someone from the United
Kingdom wrote that the world was never as massive as it is now. But, Brazil
for example, is an invaded country. Nowadays, it has a lot of invaders. They don’t have a face, but they are there. Brazil has always been an invaded country in the sense
that, instead of drinking the milk straight from the cow you have to pay taxes
to an Italian company that bottles the milk. It’s this kind of situation. We
are an invaded country, no doubt. Today, in this kind of war, the invaders
don’t have faces. But the country is invaded, no doubt. Including the banks
from Spain.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
We were briefly talking yesterday about a term that I used, “funk.” I would call that
funk music, what would you call that song?
Tom Zé 
I’m glad that it comes out like this for you and other people because at the time I was in such a mess when I composed the song that I didn’t get where I
wanted to get [with that song]. But I’m glad that it is seen as a funk song.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
You signed to Continental at a great time in that label’s trajectory in the era
in which that album was released, Arthur Verocai’s first album was released – Arthur Verocai being one of the in-house arrangers at Continental
at that time. Arnaud Rodrigues, Celia, there was a great amount
of varied records coming out on Continental. Were you aware of any of them at
that time?
Tom Zé 
Not at all. I don’t mean they weren’t good artists, but since my music was not
played on radio, it was painful for me to listen to music on the radio. I wasn’t really following. After spending eight years in a classical conservatory, I was listening to other kinds of music. I was more into the last quartets by Beethoven, the more difficult stuff.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Your next album, Todos Os Olhos, you remember this album, of course. Came out
on the same label, Continental, the following year. But gone are these songs that resembled
pop music that you would hear on the radio and were replaced by a much more
adventurous type of music, which does not sound like your first album, Grande
Liquidacao. It’s a very different sound. Can you talk a little bit
about the development between the Tom Zé third album and this Todos Os Olhos album?
Tom Zé 
This album was the closest thing that I could do at that time to what I’m
doing now. But at the same time, this album was responsible for my ostracization.
About two years after that record came out, radio stations would call and ask
about missing artists and I would be one of them. The idea of the cover came from a concretist poet from Brazil called Décio Pignatari and it actually is an asshole.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
That’s a great way to get on the radio, man.
Tom Zé 
At that time, to release an album with an asshole on the cover was not only
something to try and cheat the dictatorship, it was really something
aggressive and to go against it. There was a young band that sang the word
“breast” in one song and they got arrested after the show. So the asshole on
the cover was a symbol for resistance.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Let me play one song from this record, it actually appears on the record in
two parts, “Complexo de Épico.” It’s a very complicated song. I personally
didn’t know what to make of it the first time I heard it, I had to listen to
it a few times.
(music: Tom Zé – “Complexo de Épico” / applause) 
Tom Zé 
This song deserves a translation. Rogerio Duprat made the arrangement of this
record and made a tape loop. I started to improvise and, because of that, I
said, “Record what I sing before I forget.” The song says that every Brazilian
composer is "complexed". Why be so serious, take love so seriously,
play so seriously, kiss so seriously? Because at the time of the dictatorship
when you wanted to be free of problems, you had to appear to be a serious person. In the
song it says that you can go be serious like this in hell.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
After going back and listening to it, and I’ll be 100% honest with you and my
very limited Portuguese, I couldn’t figure out what in the world what you were
talking about. Your wordplay and the rhythms of your speech are so
interesting, it sounds like rap music to me, like hip-hop. Especially the way
you go in between the beats and you change your rhythms.
Tom Zé 
It’s interesting because hip-hop would come many years later.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
And we, who are interested in the origins of rap music, we go back to all these
cliches at a certain point. Like it started with Jamaican toasting or it
started with a religious guy or a radio DJ. Then you hear a thing like this
and the complexity is akin to what MF Doom does with his patterns.
Or I could think about what Erykah Badu said in her
lecture about this way that she tries to map out the rhythm of her words
before she records, and I hear a lot of that in this. A very unknown record
by that hip-hop generation.
Tom Zé 
In regards to what Erykah Badu said, Torquato Neto, one of the members of the
tropicália movement wrote lyrics, especially for Gilberto Gil. But even though
he was only writing the song, he was obliged to make the song himself because
then he could also map the way the song would sound like with somebody else’s
voice. Don’t take me too seriously. If it was me leading the show, I would say it’s about to end. Pardon me. We have 20 more minutes to end.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
Obviously, we can’t go through the entirety of your catalog of even what you did in the
1970s, but you did do one other album for Continental. Maybe we could briefly
talk about that because in a lot of ways it’s responsible, through David Byrne’s discovery, for the recordings
you did in the ’90s. Can I play a song from that album [Estudando O Samba]? Let’s play one song here real quick from the last album that Tom Zé did for Continental, a song
called “Toc.”
(music: Tom Zé – “Toc”)
Tom Zé 
Ah, ah. If I would choose only one song to play to you,
I would choose this. 
[applause]
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt  
“Toc.”
Tom Zé 
When I was just listening to it, I know that nowadays there is a big amount of
things that use some kind of [sampled] language. But remember, this song was
made in 1976 and was really something new at this time.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
So you said, if you could only play one song it would be that song. Why?
Tom Zé 
It was the first album that was re-released by David Byrne, Estudando o
Samba. I was invited into a classical music festival where I didn’t have to
play live, but I could play some things from the record. The song was
extremely well received and I was very touched. All the composers were sitting
on one table and somebody would go and turn on the music, no public at
all.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
We are nearing the end here, and like I said, it’s difficult to have to cut this short
here as you recorded more in the ’70s. You actually worked in the ’80s and
there is an interesting period there. You hinted at David Byrne who discovered
the record and brought you forth with the recordings in the ’90s. I suppose there’s a lot written about this and you guys can take it from
here. But you probably have some questions and now it would be an appropriate
time to open it up to the floor, unless, Tom, you have something that you
would like to say before we take questions from the participants. Any
questions?
Participant: 
I have got one question, do you listen to new music?
Tom Zé 
I have an idea. [Walks around, picks up phone book] Yesterday, I made the
show Tormenta Tropical, and I made a joke of singing things out of the phone book. I was lost, trying to get to the theater in another part of the city. It’s better to sing than to
take orientation. Then we invented a real Brazilian beat to sing it.
(music: guitarist and percussionist start a samba groove, Tom sings the title
and excerpts of the Madrid phone book)
“Las paginas blancas, Madrid capital.”'
[rings phone numbers]
[applause]
I was glad that you asked this because I was able to show that my concerts are
nothing fixed, but based on things I read in the papers or the phone book I
found in the hotel. I do it like this because I regard myself as a bad
composer, so I have to integrate as many things possible.
Eothen “Egon” Alapatt 
That was amazing, man.
Participant 
I would like to ask, do you hear the echo of tropicália in modern
Brazilian music? In the young generation of Brazilian musicians, do you hear
the trace of what you did?
Tom Zé 
It’s quite impossible to get rid of this influence in Brazil. If you are under
dictatorship it is very convenient that you don’t think about anything. Caetano and
Gil were able to build this kind of tunnel for young people that kept their
interest alive in certain things, in certain subjects. So, they were ready to what was coming
next, like data processing, the TV language, the language of advertisement
posters, the quantum theory by Max Planck. The intellectuals in
Brazil thought that the knowledge was going to come by vomits, almost when you want to throw up and then everything comes out. The second law of thermodynamics, the
entropy, is also an important factor
because it predicted a very sad end to the universe. If you use a certain
amount of energy to make something happen, to produce an event, once it is
transformed back into energy, there is an energy loss. The universe was fated to
an end in an amorphous, shapeless way, but to produce any kind of information
you need energy. The thing you guys do is to produce information and there is
no other job where the production of information is so important as it is for
what you guys are doing. Tropicalism is responsible for keeping these ideas
alive in the Brazilian spirit.
Participant 
Just a quick question out of curiosity, do you make visual art as well?
Tom Zé 
The White Pages is an example that is close to visual art and I could also try
to do something visual right now. I never thought that singing is possible for
me.
[picks up guitar and starts to play]
[applause]
