Questlove is an exceptionally musical human being. He’s one of the tightest drummers who ever walked the earth and a pretty amazing DJ as well. It’s not just readers of his OkayPlayer website who respect this man as organic, straightforward and blessed with sharp wit and deep knowledge. If the music world has to be played like a game of chess, Questlove adopted some of his strategy from studying the most luminous African-American writers and critics from jazz to rap. With the Roots he experienced the ups and downs, twists and turns of a journey to reach that elusive combo: critical acclaim with commercial success. Questlove sat down for fresh words of wisdom at the 2005 Red Bull Music Academy, from his family’s extraordinary record stashes and De La Soul’s debut to the evolution of the Roots’ sound and waaaaay beyond.
Monk One 
Welcome to our first session, my name is Andrew
Mason and the brother to
my left here is Mr. Ahmir Thompson, Questlove, welcome.
[applause]
Questlove 
Am I allowed to clap for myself?
Monk One 
Yeah, definitely, give yourself a hand. So you have had quite a journey today,
where did you wake up this morning?
Questlove 
I didn’t go to sleep [laugh].
Monk One 
Ah, OK, so there you go.
Questlove 
Yeah, I don’t sleep from fear that I might miss out on something.
Monk One 
Ah, never sleeping.
Questlove 
Yeah, pretty much, stayed up until 4.30 and then I went to the airport, I
slept on the flight out here. If I have a bed head, forgive me.
Monk One 
Yeah, that’s right. Tonight you will be doing the do at the War Room, I believe.
Questlove 
Yeah. I’ll be there.
Monk One 
Good. So, your band The Roots has just released a retrospective, 2-CD set, is that right? Did
you ever think when you were in your Square Roots days that you would be
putting out a double album best of?
Questlove 
It’s funny, we started the group, I guess in name only, 1987. I guess,
for those who don’t know the history of the group we started, I met Tariq
Trotter the first day of school,
September of ‘87. It was the first day of school, both of us were in the
principle’s office. How many people of you people have seen Ferris Bueller’s
Day Off? You remember the scene at the very end when the girl from
Dirty Dancing... Jennifer Grey, was talking to Charlie Sheen on a
cupbin or whatever. That’s pretty much how the meeting was between Tariq and
I. I was in the principle’s office to get an ID so I can get free school
tokens, and he was getting suspended on his first day of school. He was doing
unmentionables with a female in the girl’s bathroom. So it was just like a
polar opposite thing, you know what I mean? And, of course, this freshman
guy’s coming in and getting suspended on his first day of school for doing
whatever - that built his legend up, and you know, sitting there for half an
hour, he was kind of ragging on me, but then we knew that we had sort of hip-hop in common by talking about different things, and I guess when he got
reinstated back into the school, like four of five days later, he used to
always walk up to me and say like, “Play, ‘Kick The
Ball.’” To him “Kick The Ball” is
a song by the Krown Rulers but to me “Kick The Ball” is “God Made Me
Funky” by The Headhunters. So even though we
were talking two different languages pretty much, like that is how we
communicated. It was like a novelty thing, because the fact that hip-hop
production was so spare and so simple back in 1987, 1988, the majority of it
was just breakbeat driven, it wasn’t too melodic, so he’d just run up to me
like, “Yo, do “Top Billin,” and, you know, like this you impress the girls, like he knows everything, play “Top Billin” so I had to play it on the locker room.
Monk One 
So, “Kick The Ball”, for the people who don’t know, is sort of a legendary
early golden era Philly rap record.
Questlove 
Yeah, the Krown Rulers.
Monk One 
By the Krown Rulers, and it made use of the “God Make Me Funky” breakbeat by
The Headhunters, which also Steady B used right around that time.
Questlove 
Yeah, well, De La Soul also spoofed it on 3 Feet High And
Rising with “Take It Off” so...
Monk One
That’s right
Questlove 
But, you know, when we started the group, it was a name only between ‘87 to
about ‘92. Then, by that point I graduated school and I got accepted into
Juilliard and Tariq went to university and we kind of wondered where our
future, you know, what lies ahead. Because pretty much in Philadelphia there
is zero outlet whatsoever. I mean, we have Ruff House Records, but besides
that internship and that type of stuff really there wasn’t anything going on
in terms of doing anything musical, no open mics, no such a thing like the
[Lyricist Lounge][https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/06/lyricist-lounge-oral-history] or anything
like that. So in 1992 we kind of asked ourselves like, “OK, what are we going
to do with our lives?” And that was when we decided to actually take it to the
streets and just become street musicians and set up and see what happens. And
once it caught on - and we eventually met our management some four months
later - and the whole idea of making a record, I mean, that was 1992 and in my
head the future was 1998, I couldn’t even see that far. I figure, that’s
actually one of the main problems with music or maybe life in general, like,
not too many people play chess to the point where they actually think about
what are they going to do. I had no thoughts of, “OK, 1993 I have a record
deal. Will I still be here, will I still be relevant in 2003?” That was too
far to think about, like I’m thinking the world might implode, could be like
The Jetsons, 2000 seemed like future. So in no way could I think at that point
that in 2006 I would be releasing my 11th record. You know, that type of
thing, especially in hip-hop, like you are done in four years, so...
Monk One 
That’s right, yeah. I remember when the Fat Boys and Run DMC, they were the
only ones that had actually multiple albums out.
Questlove 
Yeah, so once we didn’t catch on like wild fire, because when Do You Want
More?!!!??! came out, and I’m not saying things like, well, no one thinks like me in hip-hop
or that type of thing, but I was so obsessed with making critically acclaimed
records and that type of stuff. Like, I would go to the library, I would read
Vince Aletti reviews in Rolling Stone. Even if you were to go to my house
right now, the house that I grew up in, my father left my room unscathed since
when I had been there last and pretty much like there is about 400 reviews,
you know, Rolling Stone always do the main review and they would do like a
illustration thing. I put all those up as my wallpaper and I would always
leave a space for if The Roots would eventually make records and I would write
our record reviews and I would envision, “OK, this is our first album, this is
going to be our second album and then the fourth album would suck and they
only give us three stars”, and you know, that type of thing. That’s what I was
always thinking about. So once it didn’t catch on because I just thought that,
if it seems new, if it seems fresh, they are going to love it. Because
when De La Soul released 3 Feet High And Rising, I mean, Nelson George, he
danced a jig, he wrote like this marvelous... I mean, I thought it was my
group, and I was reading Billboard magazine. Nelson George at the time was one
of the head writers for black music at Billboard magazine and pretty much he
had a very influential voice, as far as like being critically acclaimed. I
guess, between him and Greg Tate, those two were like the gatekeepers of black
reviews. And if Nelson George or Greg Tate endorsed your record and then all
the other critics, Robert Christgau, all those cats from the Village Voice,
all the hip cats would then acclaim your record. And when he wrote his review
on 3 Feet High And Rising, I thought, “OK, well, this is our chance”. So,
not that I was trying to make 3 Feet High And Rising, but I just figured,
this seems like some pretty new in 1993, let’s see what happens. And
one thing I didn’t take into account was the release of The
Chronic had really
opened the floodgates to how we thought at the time. I consider The Chronic
to be like sort of a double-edged sword. Dr. Dre’s The Chronic was an album
that, I guess, for the first time in hip-hop’s history allowed an artist with
street credibility to actually do big numbers. And to me, that was like the
equivalent of Eve biting in the apple, you know? All that naivety was gone,
and all of a sudden you realize you are naked and you know certain things and
there is a formula for it and as a result everyone followed suit. So when we
didn’t hit, then all of a sudden I started to panic and I started to say, “OK,
what are we going to do in 1998? What are we going to do in 2001? What are we
going to do?” I still think like, “OK, 2015 – what are we going to do?” You
know, it’s a chess game.
Monk One 
So, now the chess mentality you are approaching things in that way thinking
some of the moves ahead.
Questlove 
Mhm, it’s a little scary because there is never room for a rest. I’m just
neurotic by nature, I would say that I have been the neurotic one of the
group, I’m the anal retentive one. I’m the one I’ll cry and I’ll curse our
record executive if the fonts aren’t right on the record. I’m the small
detailed guy of the group.
Monk One 
I think people can recognize that looking at the liner notes.
Questlove 
[laughs]
Monk One 
Has it always been that way from the beginning? I mean, the dynamics of the
group, you know?
Questlove 
I know it makes me seem like a control freak. I think I just make a product
that I would like. You know, I am that kind of guy. I like great liner notes,
I like the science of a record as opposed to, you know, people can listen to a
record on the surface and I’m more interested in what was the time of the
record and how many beats per minute was it, you know? I don’t know the method
to my madness, I don’t know why I take interest in small details as opposed to
the big picture. That is how I’ve always been.
Monk One 
It seems to be important in a group to have somebody at least who is going to
take that role and kind of being responsible for the overall picture.
Questlove 
I just think for The Roots, there is almost like a triple standard at least,
that’s how I felt, especially in the beginning. A lot of people felt that: “Oh
man, you guys are killing the culture.” Like a lot of surface critics, whatever
would say, “Wow, you guys don’t use a 1200, you’re trying to kill the culture
by not using a DJ,” or that type of thing. I just always found out that I
could never leave any detail to rest whatsoever, and a lot of early press
that we had to do, I found myself almost quite adversarial to almost
defensive. You know, the house band in hip-hop wasn’t always samples and even
going even back to – not many people know that – the irony of “Rappers
Delight” was that
they displayed seven, eight, or nine things that would set the pace for hip-hop in the next 25 years, from scatting, the sampling - the percussion break
of the very intro of the Sugarhill Gang was from another record.
Monk One 
Alan Hawkshaw’s Discophonia.
Questlove 
Yeah, exactly. The irony of them interpolating, getting a band to interpolate
a break, then sampling another record for the intro and the strings from Chic,
those were sampled, you know, not used with a drum machine, but still the idea
of sampling, them scatting, jazz rap, doing long, long... You know, there is a
lot of firsts on that record, just besides of that being the first hip-hop...
Monk One 
Biting.
Questlove 
Oh, biting someone else’s rhymes. Yeah, you know, the list can go on and on.
Monk One
Definitely. So, you mentioned De La Soul, how do you feel the Native
Tongues thing
influenced you? Because I think that The Roots are seen as a continuation of
that lineage.
Questlove 
I’ve always had a love for hip-hop and a love for records in general, but when
De La Soul came out, I think, at one point in every teenager’s life there is
always a group or an event that will shape and mold them into whatever they
become as an adult. And I know that for 1977 a lot of angst-ridden kids felt
that the group for them was the Sex Pistols. For me, it’s like I’ve seen three
cats that actually looked like I did and had the same mentality. I think
there’s no one that is really involved in hip-hop that can’t say that some way
or another Public Enemy’s It Takes A Nation Of
Millions record didn’t affect them in some way, especially if
you are involved in production. So I would say that’s the first album that
really got me, because I was hearing my father’s whole record collection in 70
minutes. I could say, “OK, that’s David Bowie, that’s Cymande, that’s James Brown, that’s The Honey
Drippers,” because they
crammed so much samples and so much outside work inside of their songs, then
it just became a name-that-tune thing. So when De La did it and the way that
Prince Paul’s mind works, like, he was going even further than where Public Enemy was taking it,
they took some rock breaks here and there, but it was primarily soul as the
basics, you know? Ultimate Breaks and
Beats stuff, James
Brown, Mandrill,
Jimmy Castor Bunch, that type of
thing. Whereas De La Soul, I mean, they could take Marlo Thomas’s “Free To Be
You And Me,” they could take it from [Schoolhouse
Rock][https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2017/08/schoolhouse-rock-and-hip-hop], you know, because the
household I grew up in, I grew up with three very distinct record
collections. My father was very big on anything from the ‘60s and ‘70s
primarily in pop, so he would always play Abbey Road, he put me hip to Pet
Sounds by The Beach Boys. Songwriters... he liked Tapestry by Carole King,
Just As I Am by Bill Withers, so that was my father’s music. My mother was
very much into soul, into funk, my father’s stash was like 5,000 deep in the
living room. My mother’s stash was maybe 200 or 300 deep in another part of
the living room, but that was her stash. So that’s where the Earth, Wind and
Fire, the Funkadelic, I think, she just chose her albums based on how crazy
the cover looked. So, Rufus and Chaka Khan, Marvin Gaye, you know, like the
soul stuff. My sister, who musically is a total weirdo, I mean, my sister was
raised on AM radio, so that’s where a lot of the space in between Pet Sounds
and Chocolate City by Parliament, my sister was in between there. And she’s
closer to my age, so she would play like a, there was a song by Little River
Band “Reminiscent” or something like that, “You Are The Biggest Part Of Me,” really like AM radio, oh man like...
Monk One 
“Brother Louie.”
Questlove 
Oh man, that’s a racist ass song, man [laughs]. I just listened to the
lyrics like two weeks ago. No, I’m playing, I like that song. So my sister was
always the thin line between that. She was big on Phoebe Snow, James Taylor, Ambrosia,
but then, depending on who were her best friends for the week was in
high school, then she would bring in David Bowie and Ziggy Stardust stuff. A
lot of her friends also had influence on whatever guy she liked. If she was
dating a football player then, maybe he would leave his, I still have it,
one of the guys she dated, his name was Fletcher, he used to always play
“Showdown” by The Isley Brothers and he left the 8-track. That, and Heatwave’s
“Too Hot To Handle”. So I still have those two 8-tracks and that’s it. Pretty
much my whole childhood was all those records - of which most of those records
weren’t just your traditional or like Jackson Five, Stevie Wonder. Most
artists say, “Yo, Stevie Wonder was big in my life and so was Michael
Jackson.” You know, I had that, but then I had all the stuff in between. So
all that stuff in between was on that De La Soul record. And it was done in
such a smart-ass way so that it just drew me totally into it. And that’s when
I knew, OK, this is what I want to do for a living.
Monk One 
De La was really unapologetic about using whatever worked, I mean, whether it
be Steely Dan or...
Questlove 
Then they were.
Monk One 
Then they were? What are you saying?
Questlove 
Erm, even though De La Soul Is Dead, their follow-up record, is the better
album and my favorite of their nine albums, I definitely think that they took
a lot of flack. And they told me a lot of stories, things that I take for
granted now, the fact that our audience is 90, 92, 93% white, that was very
foreign to them. So you can imagine the whole psychological mind blow that it
is to come... You think you are doing a black art form, people just don’t study
on the social and psychological aspect of how the world is run. That could be
a genuine surprise to them. Like: “Wait a minute, I’m doing an art form that
comes from the slum.” I mean, the reason why hip-hop was even invented is the
social conditions and the economic depression of how times were forced them to
create this art form. You know, Flash tells me, “My parents couldn’t afford to
give me music lessons, but I knew how to be an engineer, so I built speakers
and I became a DJ.” Thus hip-hop was born. In your mind as the creator you are
thinking you are creating an art form that is going to speak to your people,
and then a whole other culture comes and gravitates towards it, that can be
mind-blowing. And in the beginning, the beginning for De La at least in the
late ‘80s and early ‘90s, Cypress Hill, too, they were telling me, they caught
a lot of flack for, you know, “You guys are selling out because there is a lot
of white people in the audience, you know?” Stuff like that is nonsense to me.
I understand now why this music speaks to a vast array of people, but in the
very beginning you don’t understand that. If anybody ever wants to see where
the music is heading or that type of thing, all you need to do is check out
another genre, which is easy. If you want to know the future of hip-hop, just
look at jazz. You see that jazz was sort of an underground phenomenon for the
first ten years, rather taboo-ish, same thing with hip-hop, “It’s not going to
last, it’s going to be a phase,” that type of thing. [For the] first 20 years
periodicals were calling them heroin addicts, druggies, and you are the
devil, and the government was against it, and same with hip-hop, it was a
threat, you know? FBI lead us to N.W.A., that type of thing. Pretty soon it’s
going to become your parent’s music. [I’m] going to be 40 in five years, I’ll
be a parent, you know, it’s definitely like you can see the parallel levels of
hip-hop and jazz. So the fact that blues, jazz, rock, the fact that they were
black art forms, that eventually you can look at it two different ways, either
abandoned by the people that created it, or gravitated towards another group
of people that keep it alive today. And it’s absolutely no surprise to me, but
because of the time period in ‘89, ‘90, ‘91, kind of to my dismay, De La Soul
felt it was somewhat necessary for them to sort of kill that particular part
of their lives and sort of have to prove that: “OK, we are real hip-hop, we
are going to kill our image.” As a result, it’s not quite the same. I know
it’s too much to ask a person who is 35, 36 to make the same records that you
made when you were 19, 20. But a lot of people ask that about my own group:
“How come you guys don’t do the same records like when you were...” So I
understand that you just can’t do the same thing over again.
Monk One 
But as far as De La goes, what influence do you think the change in the
sampling laws and the lesser role of Prince Paul in the group had in changing
that as well? That’s got to have had a big influence in the sound.
Questlove 
Again, everything that I state here is just my personal opinion, it’s not law
or whatever. It’s kind of dangerous to me when you mess with a formula. Like,
it’s good to grow and to explore, but I think that it was more important for
them to break away from the chains of being dependent on one particular person
to navigate the ship to whatever the destination is. And in the case of De La
Soul the navigator was Prince Paul, a producer coming from Long Island who was
absolutely just zany in his ‘everything-but-the-kitchen-sink’ approach of
music production. And, I guess, at one point even Dave and Pos said, they
didn’t want to be puppets for that long, they felt as though, “OK, well, we
were crawling in the beginning but now we know how to walk, so let’s do it on
our own.” Same thing with Lauryn Hill, like Lauryn Hill’s whole thing was
that, “Well, I need to show the world that I am not the tambourine playing
foil of Wyclef. That I have my own ideas, that I want to execute, that I want
to display.” So the lines get a little blurred when you are trying to do your
personal agenda as opposed to what your audience sort of expects from you. So
that’s like an artistic tug of war thing that you [have to cope with].
Monk One 
How do you deal with that, knowing that obviously you are a person who pays
attention to reviews and that kind of thing, knowing what people expect? How
do you relate that to what you might want to do creatively as an artist and
does that give you a writer’s block or does it make it difficult for you to
proceed?
Questlove 
The reason that we have been here for so long, I mean, there is a pro and a
con to it. If this is a mark of success [shows an imaginary point], you
know, if Jay-Z is here and Dr. Dre, Eminem, like people that are above the
Mason-Dixon line, then we are sort of bubbling under [shows a point a little
bit lower]. It has always been the thing like, “OK, any minute now, you guys
are going to blow.” I think, it has hurt us and helped us at the same time. It
helped us because we never rose above what I personally believe is a
particular watermark, us surfacing under that level. I don’t know, I think it
actually kept us here longer and kept interest in us. And creatively, I just
felt we really had nothing to lose. If there is one Roots album, which we felt
like we had something to prove, then I’ll be honest and admit that our third
album, Illadelph Halflife, was that record. Because
Organix, which was
perceived as the audition record or the demo, we never considered the only
people that we needed to reach with that were the record executives that
wanted to see what the group was about, so once we got a record deal it was
cool. Because the market place changed so drastically with Do You Want
More?, I would say towards the end of it Do You Want More? was sort of like
a - if you guys have ever seen the scene of Reservoir Dogs, the movie, where
there is what they call the Mexican stand-off, the very last scene in the
film where like this five guys in the room are holding guns on each other?
Just to be on the roof for two years plus the psychological grind of sort of,
you know, you arrive at a venue that holds a 1,000 people, only 40 show up,
there is not a way that you can’t help to think, ‘Oh god, I am a failure’. Not
to mention you watch other acts, without ease they have made it, they are on
TV, they are on the radio, they are getting love, and you are like, “Wait,
aren’t we good?”
Monk One 
You are on the outside looking in.
Questlove 
Oh my god, yeah. I’m happy in retrospect that we went through that period, but
that was the most confusing moments ever. Like we thought, “OK, all we had to
do was be good.”
Monk One 
Is this post-Do You Want More?
Questlove 
This is post-Do You Want More?, pre-Illadelph Halflife. Do You Want
More? was completed April of 1994 and released by Geffen in the United States
in January of 1995.
Monk One 
How long were you working on that?
Questlove 
On that album?
Monk One 
Yeah.
Questlove 
We started December of 1993. For those who have Do You Want More?, the
version of “Say What Man” on
that album, I mean, that was essentially our first song, because we recorded,
I guess, our celebration “Alright we got a record deal”-party. I included a
song on the Homegrown retrospective,
it’s like one of the most embarrassing tapes ever. But I thought it was
important that we should show every aspect of The Roots, even the horrible
cringe, “Oh god, I can’t believe I made that.” Like, we thought we made it,
“We made it, we made it, we made it!” And then nothing happened. It was like,
“It’s your fault.” Then they said, “Well, the drums sound too live, we need
the sound more hip-hop.” And then I was like, “You don’t talk anything except
how dope you are as an MC,” it was a very tense felt time. So when we got to
Illadelph Halflife that was our conscious effort to make a real hip-hop
album. That was the time I felt the pressure like, “OK, we have got something
to prove.” But because that album was such the polar opposite of the album
that came before, then I just said, “OK, why don’t we do just this from now
on? Why don’t we just reinvent ourselves every album up?” And sure enough, for
every album that comes out, I expect a particular fan base to be sort of
turned off and alienated. For all the people that cry, “Oh no, Do You Want
More? is like the definitive Roots album.” No, when it came out, Organix
had such an audience to it, like all the boho-jazzy, the incense-lightning,
you know, all the poet beatnik people, all the black Jack Kerouac people, we
thought we had them. When they first heard “Distortion To
Static” they were turned off,
like, “What is this crap, are you guys rappers now?” That’s what they would
say! “You guys are rapping?” And they hated it. And sure enough, when
Illadelphia Halflife came out all the Do You Want More? _supporters were
like, “This is garbage, what are you, Wu-Tang?” And then when _Things Fall
Apart came out
they were like, “This soulful stuff, what is with the hard Wu-Tang stuff you
were doing?” You know, like for every album.
Monk One 
Then you are a rock band.
Questlove 
Yeah, for now. By the time Phrenology came out a lot of people of all The Roots albums, I
think, for now the one they ask about the most, which is basically, “What were
you guys thinking?” And my whole thing was I now know and understand why
certain superpowers in the world of music are corporations. It’s a shock for
people to find out that, “Oh, Dr. Dre doesn’t do all the beats that we see on
his records?” No, there is Mike Elizondo, there is Scott
Storch, he has
underlings doing work for him. Same with
Babyface, you think it
is a coincidence that you haven’t heard...? You know, 10 years ago Babyface
was monopolizing the adult contemporary world. And then, all of a sudden like
that you think he decided to retire? No. You can’t be a superpower and
dominate just one area. And for us, our dominating area was the stage, you
know? These albums that we released were basically, you know, when you go to a
club and someone hands you a flyer? Like, these records were flyers to the big
picture, which was The Roots show. And for every album that came out, that
meant that we had to devote two years to performing the world four times over
at least before we even thought about stepping in the studio to do another
record. That said, because we hit some sort of touchdown or field goal with
Things Fall Apart. 800,000 units for a group of our calibre I consider like
Thriller numbers. Not to mention on how we won that Grammy, I’ll never know,
that’s one of the biggest mysteries of life. My theory was that, again, the
Mexican stand-off theory, Dr. Dre was nominated twice, Snoop and Eminem,
Puff, R.Kelly, Janet Jackson, Busta Rhymes, and the one is The Roots?
Everyone had a gun to each other and offed each other and then we were like
the last men standing like, “OK, we’ll take this, thank you.” [laughter] So
that said, I mean, after five years of knocking on the door, rejection, ‘94,
‘95, ‘96, ‘97, ‘98 and finally 1999 is like, “Hey, come in!” And all of a
sudden D’Angelo wants you to copilot his record and Erykah Badu wants you to
work on her record, and Common wants you to work on his record, and here is
Bilal, and here is Mos and here is Talib Kweli, and here is Slum Village, and
here is... You know, and you have to be on the road for two and a half years,
and you have a home life, some of us have kids, some of us have wives,
girlfriends, whatever, some had to take a backseat. So the thing that took a
backseat after Things Fall Apart was the idea of us going back to the studio
to make another record. But a funny thing happened on the way to, which was
neo-soul fever. And it was like, “OK, well, Jill [Scott] is out, Musiq is out,
Bilal is out, and all these artists are out,” and it was like, “What do we do?”
And it was a risk, but I knew something told me that the oncoming millennium,
and it is at least from 2000 to 2010, something told me that this was going to
be the age of irony. That’s all I thought about it. I thought, “OK, we can
capitalize on it, maybe do another song, trying give Roni Size a call, hook up
with the 4Hero cats and take this drum ‘n’ bass thing a little further, that’s
where I want to go. Maybe have another musician or two.” But I think somewhere
in 2001 I was just, like, “Yo, why don’t we just throw all this away and do
the anti-Roots record?” Like, I had a feeling that no matter what we release,
one we are going to take a beating because by that point we were just getting
so much critical acclaim that I started feeling guilty, you know? And then on
top of that, there is just no evidence of a reward, like, “OK, we went gold
and there is a Grammy, but financially it was the same situation, socially it
was the same situation,” you know? OK, maybe I was cool because by this point
people started recognizing this [points at his hair]. But Tariq goes to a
club, there is stories out, they still made me stand in line. So it wasn’t like
they were rolling out the red carpet or anything. So I felt like something was
in the air and I felt like we were going to take a beating. So if you want to
call Phrenology that Eminem moment in 8 Mile where he decides, “OK, well
I’m going to beat you to the plinth and beat myself up before you got a chance
to do it,” now whether that is psychosomatic or being a self-saboteur, I
don’t know, like get a psychologist up here to over-analyze the situation -
erm, we just decided let’s make the anti-Roots record. And it was a Hail
Mary, I swear, and not to mention of all things in October our label
announced to us that we are closing our doors. So we are not going to have a
label in two months, we already had a nightmare of a six months first single
that situation with “Break You
Off.” And now we are not about to
have a label, so the only thing in our minds, like the album is coming out in
November, which is really scaring me to death because November 17th, 22 other albums... this week
right here is the most important week in the music industry. This is black
Friday, like this is the week where the industry expects you to go out and
buy...
Monk One 
Spend your Christmas money.
Questlove 
Yeah, and there is 22 other records coming out, so how are we going to
compete? So like we thought about all this way months ahead of time, so pretty
much we knew that Phrenology was going to be that Hail Mary throw.
Monk One 
For the people who don’t know the terminology Hail Mary in American football is
when you just throw the ball up and hope somebody catches it somewhere. You
don’t have a plan about what you are going to do, where it’s going to land and
luckily someone caught it.
Questlove 
Yeah, and then it was like, “Ah, we meant to do that, thank you.” [laughter]
But if we would have failed, “Yeah, OK.” And then the opposite side of that
coin, you know, Common’s Electric Circus comes out a week later and just
that crucial seven-day period was, I mean, a lot of people had their
questions about his album in general. I mention it because I was heavily
involved in it. But not many people know that was a very crucial seven-day
period of the album’s life. We just got lucky because the people at our label
decided to approve budgets that lasted all the way up until April. And then
they all got fired. But we still had that budget money, so we could still make
“The Seed” video in January,
even when there was no label. And we hired the right people, independent
promotion people to promote that single even though there was no label. Common
let seven days go by and had no legs to stand on, so he had to let the album
drown, and as a result he is very apologetic for Electric Circus, you know, “OK, I’m sorry about that.” So it was, too, a Hail Mary throw, so luckily The Roots...
Monk One 
Yeah, Electric Circus was the one that did not land.
Questlove 
But that’s funny because of the two that’s my favorite album. I mean creatively, if we are going to judge on strictly creative work, I love that
album to death. But that was a very, very trying period, you know? Two
Hail Mary throws, and luckily someone was there to see the ball and catch
it.
Monk One 
Now you mentioned Dre earlier, Dr.Dre, and the fact that other people make his
beats. For one of the people who is working with him a lot is Mr. Storch.
Questlove 
Scott Storch, a Root.
Monk One 
A former Square Root, right? A Root from the very early days.
Questlove 
I mean, Do You Want More? is very much Scott’s record. He was a
Stevie Wonder-ophile, he discovered
Innervisions.
Even though I knew what a Fender Rhodes was, a majority of the hip-hop nation
wasn’t even hip to adding outside instruments to their production work. I
will give you that specific moment. There is a song by The Pharcyde on their
debut album Bizarre Ride II The Pharcyde, it’s called “4 Better Or 4
Worse”, and J-Swift, the producer of the song,
used a live Fender Rhodes. The week that it
came out, literally changed the game for a lot of people. Even Pete Rock was
like, “Yo, what’s the name of that whole dreamy sounding keyboard thing? What,
Fender Rhodes? Damn, I have got to get me one of those.” Yo literally, I was
in front of people, when he first heard “4 Better Or 4 Worse.” Q-Tip knew about
it already and the ending result would be the Midnight Marauders record. If
The Low End Theory was the upright bass album for Tribe, then Midnight
Marauders was the Fender Rhodes record. And for us, when we first heard that, because there was not much Fender Rhodes on the Organix record, we were
still just drums, upright bass, and that was it, but when Scott
bought a used one, and we just sat there and listened to everything, like,
everything that we have had done. Like, “Yo, try this on that,” you know?
Monk One 
And “Distortion To Static” has that intro that’s all Rhodes, isn’t it?
Questlove 
Yeah. I mean, pretty much that was the sound of The Roots for a good four to
five years, and then Phrenology came and kicked it off the latch.
Monk One 
It seems like Scott decided to approach things in a different way from what
you all had done, what you have been telling me about. He has really gone into the
behind-the-scenes-production side of it.
Questlove 
Yeah, Scott got involved with the Dre camp during the time we were doing the
“You Got Me” record. I don’t
know to what level our keyboards player Kamaal was socializing with Eve, Eve,
the rapper, back then she was the Eve of Destruction. She had caught the ear
of Dr. Dre and he signed her to Aftermath in late 1998. So I know that Scott was
begging like, “Yo, introduce me to Dre, introduce me to Dre, let him know that
I… introduce me!” She introduced Scott and the very first thing Scott played
for Dre he was like, “Go, play something.” I think the very first thing that
Scott played to Dre was the “Still
Dre” [hums the melody]. Scott
has a very choppy melodic style about his songwriting approach, very staccato,
very rhythmic, still melodic. So I knew he was with Dre and loyal to Dre for a
good three to four years and then he did a small apprentice thing with
Timbaland, I know that Scott did it without credit. I know that he did “Cry Me
A River” for Justin Timberlake. I know he did “Hola Hovito” for The
Blueprint album for Jay-Z. I mean, that is pretty much the name of the game,
Kanye West did it for Bad Boy. If you are a beatmaker and you make the hot
beat, the hot song of the moment, everybody is going to come after you. And
you want to capitalize on that, you know? But I think it’s virtually
impossible for one human being to work and produce that mass volume. The
supply and the demand is just too much, it’s like a flood, and you are running trying not to
drown. So the next logical thing you can do is either find minions [laughs] or find workers, so to speak, to help you keep your brand name alive, and
eventually, I guess, you can step out of that. That’s how 90% of the hip-hop
nation gets their start. Not many people know that Pharrell and Chad were
apprentices of Teddy Riley. Like, Pharrell wrote “Rumpshaker” for Wreckx ‘N’
Effect and “Use Your Heart” for SWV, before they finally got put on as The
Neptunes. Like, that’s the name of the game.
Monk One 
And the engineer that originally worked with them back in that day and still
working there...
Questlove 
Oh, Andrew Coleman.
Monk One 
Andrew Coleman, who is, if you read the fineprint in The Neptunes notes, he
is on all of them. And he is sort of the hidden ingredient.
Questlove 
Yeah, he is. I worked with Drew a lot, when I worked on the N.E.R.D. record,
pretty much all that. In Virginia Beach it is a really small community, so the
studio they were using at the time used to be Teddy Riley’s studio, so it
just changed its owners.
Monk One 
So you weren’t tempted at any of these times when Scott was having hits with
Dre and Timbaland and all that, to call him up and say, “Scott, The Roots need
a little help. Hit us off with one of those. Give me a “Lean Back,” man.”
Questlove 
Ha, ha.
Monk One 
Got another one of those?
Questlove 
It sounds like that, right? With Scott, it is still a lot of a given that we
work with each other on the next album or whatever. The main difference
between Scott’s involvement with The Roots pre-Tipping
Point and
Tipping Point was that I opted not to go to Miami where he resides now.
Scott has always come to Philadelphia, I mean, he has lived in Philadelphia.
And I opted not to go down there. So one of the dangers, not dangers, but one
of the things you sort of expect in hip-hop is what I call ‘demo-itis’, which
is whenever a demo... at least I like to control the atmosphere in which demos
get distributed in The Roots camp. Because what happens is you come up with an
idea, you execute the music, Tariq [Trotter] might write a quicky verse, might
not even the verse for that song, he’ll just spit something to see if it
sounds natural enough, and then we all make CD copies of it, and then we’ll
live with it. One of the dangers of that is five weeks down the line, if you
have more ideas to it or whatever, then Tariq starts feeling like, “Hm, I like
it how it was on the demo.” So we call it ‘demo-itis’. The thing with “Don’t
Say Nuttin’” from The Tipping Point, which Scott produced, was, our new president, Jimmy Iovine, head of
Interscope, got ‘demo-it is.’ Which was that, he heard some ideas that Scott did. As
a band we were going to just basically take them as we have always done, like
Scott programmed “You Got Me,” the traditional way [plays keys]. He would
play a song, he would program drums, and then give me the CD and, be like, “OK, this is
the idea of the song.” And then I take it, sort of mold it how The Roots would
do it, that was always the mode of operation. With “Don’t Say Nuttin’,” in its
demo form, Jimmy Iovine, who is the president of Interscope Records, when MCA
melted and fell apart in December of 2002, of the 30-something acts that were
on that label, only seven of us got saved. Talib Kweli got saved because
Dr. Dre liked Talib Kweli. Basically, Jimmy Iovine called Dr. Dre and said,
“OK, who do we save, who do we let drown?” So Dre is like, “Talib is hot.”
“OK, so let’s keep Talib.” Common was about to drown, but the irony of it all
was Common did a Coke commercial much to the dismay of his fanbase and
Prefuse 73, who did that long-ass five paragraph diatribe [stretches his
Arms] of how Common was of the devil because he did a Coke commercial. That
Coke commercial was initially slated for The Black Eyed Peas, who pre-Elephunk were the minions of the Interscope label. Without telling Jimmy
they accepted a Dr. Pepper commercial, which then prevented them from also
endorsing Coke, so Jimmy Iovine didn’t want to let this million-dollar
campaign that he worked so hard for let go. So he decided, “I have got to find
somebody to be in this Coke commercial,” and then, “Common [whistles], come
here quick!” [laughter] Because Common has saved his ass by doing the Coke
commercial, Jimmy was going to let Common go, because Electric Circus
debacle, and said, “Yeah, he’s a good kid, I like him, alright, we save him.”
Just like that, that Coke commercial saved Common’s ass. So he got saved, we
got saved, because “The Seed” was doing big business for Phrenology. Mary J.
Blige naturally got saved, Blink 182 got saved, and then pretty much, I think
they kept Bilal as well. Then they let everybody go. The only problem is we
are now part of the Interscope empire. Now, I know for a lot of aspiring young
producers, rappers or whatnot, they’ll look at whatever the hottest label is.
When I grew up, you know, “Oh man, yeah, we want to be on Def Jam.” You know,
all my little journs, all my record reviews were all from Def Jam, a little
irony [chuckles]. Yeah, it was all on Def Jam. Sometimes the best just won’t
do. Already, I felt kind of skeptical with the situation, because you have one
man that is controlling the careers of probably the most successful people in
music now. He has hands all over on U2. You know, him and Bono talk every day,
so it’s like, [counts with his fingers] you are controlling U2, you are
controlling No Doubt and Gwen Stefani, Ashlee Simpson, Eminem, Dr.Dre, Snoop
Dogg, he just signed Pharrell to the label. That’s eight people already. Oh,
I forgot about Fifty, 50 Cent and G-Unit, so Banks and Bucks, both did
platinum numbers. So we are up to 13, not to mention there is a Nine Inch
Nails record somewhere. Fred Durst is still relevant for the label, Beck still
does platinum numbers. So you are dealing with 15 or 16 acts that are multi-
platinum, at the very worst 1.8 million, at the very best 10 million, and here
comes the only black group of musicians with a record deal. The Roots are the
only group of black musicians with a major recording deal. We are limping on
our gold legs, but Common, who released Electric Circus, Mos Def, oh, Mos
Def also got saved because of his movie career and the HBO show. No, to Jimmy
it was like, “Oh, the guy from the HBO show, OK, he can come too.” [audience
chuckles] So, it was very much like that. It felt like a mafioso thing, like,
“[waves]Yeah, yeah, yeah, you guys can come.” The only artist he was
excited about was Mary J. Blige and what really scared us was the Love &
Life record. I mean, the album they were like so hands-on, and Dr. Dre, and all, “Oh, we have got to call Puffy back.” They took it, and it fumbled, then
everyone got scared, and so we were just like, “Oh, man, we are so dead.” So
we go to Jimmy’s office meeting him for the first time, and it was a brief 10-minute meeting, so we sat down, and it was quiet, lot of affirmative
headshaking [shakes his head], no one said anything. And then he says, “Yeah,
I didn’t like your last record.” And then we were like, [pause – keeps on
nodding his head] “OK.” [chuckles] He said, “So, OK, what have you got?”
Already I’m just like, “Oh man, the energy is not right. This is not Geffen
Records, it’s so fast food here.” We played him some of the stuff from The
Tipping Point, it’s like, “OK, this guy is not going to understand a Big
Daddy Kane reference.” You realize this is not Big Daddy Kane, this is Tariq
imitating Big Daddy Kane, the stuff is just totally going over his head. And
then the remote was not working on the CD player [everybody chuckles], and
then the next song comes on, and it is the “Don’t Say Nuttin’” demo, but
because we didn’t Roots-ify it up yet, I couldn’t stop it. He said, “Wow,
don’t touch it!” And he is listening and all of a sudden he starts moving. Of
course, it is going to be familiar to him because that’s Dr. Dre [air quotes] doing the, I mean, Scott Storch. Of course, it is going to feel
familiar to him because all those elements that were Dre are right there, so
it feels familiar to him. And then he says, “That’s the one.” Now, because
we’re totally like a fish out of water, it’s like, “OK, well, we want to
definitely go with the energy.” His whole energy had changed. He stopped the
CD. I mean, this is the classic textbook situation of where you watch, I
mean, he is not mafioso, I mean, he is as powerful as a Tony Soprano-type
[laughter], but he is more like a Joe Pesci-small type
[laughter]. Wait, is this going on the Internet? [laughter]
Monk One 
Going to have a hit put on you, man.
Questlove 
Yeah, I’m very careful of what I am saying [laughs]. But he is the guy who
says, if you work at Interscope probably the phrase you most often say is,
“How high?!” He will just do like that [claps] and you will do whatever. And
all of a sudden, because of his energy changing, all of a sudden the five or
six executives, like our marketing guy, the A&R person and everyone else
that was very hands-off to us, they were basically content and happy with us
being led to the slaughter, “We don’t care, you are not messing up our
benefits.” All of a sudden, they were returning our phone calls. And we were
like, “So now Jimmy is happy, and so now you guys will actually approve this
budget?” “Yeah, yeah, you know Jimmy is happy, he is excited, he brought the
marketing people down and everything. He is like banging the desk, he is
putting in calls to Steven Hill at BET, you know, [makes a call] I am going
to have this video made for you in three weeks, and you are just going to play
it.” Da-da-da-da. So we just thought, “OK, he didn’t like the last record, he
loves this song, he is not big on artsy fartsy pretentious, you know...”
Monk One 
Big Daddy Kane references.
Questlove 
Yeah, all that derivative stuff from the past. Do we roll with it? That was
the biggest illing we had. Do we roll with this energy or do we go on the next
logical step for The Roots’ evolution? Because it was so early on, I didn’t
know what the other option would be, I wish I could tell you. No, wait, I do
know what it was. We go to Cuba. We were thinking, “OK, well, maybe we should
make the Graceland
album? Let’s go to a whole different country, get some new energy, and do
that.” But once this came to play, it was like, “OK, we can do the world
record later. Alright, let’s make the make-Jimmy-happy-record.” So, we wanted
to just basically make a very dry, normal album, and because I had studied all
those Rolling Stone reviews, I figured, “OK, Bruce Springsteen made
Nebraska, a very simple voice and guitar record. OK, there is no crime
behind that.” I figured, Phrenology was everything but the kitchen sink, and
we were doing everything that we weren’t supposed to be doing. OK, let’s do
the opposite, we are still going to throw off our fanbase, it is going to be
the opposite, it is going to be distinctive.” [whistles] We are cool
[whistles], [but] we weren’t [laughs]. I mean, 400,000 is nothing to scoff at, but to me, I consider an album successful if it can at least reach the
500,000 gold mark. I mean, we made it to 400,000, and probably the most
frustrating experience of it all was the fact that, because the embarrassment
of the failure, they consider that a failure, they were like, “Oh my god, we
failed. We own MTV by the neck, we own BET by the neck, we own Clear Channel.”
We call and say, “Na-na-na-na-na, you know, we control the world.” He said
Like, “Wow, I thought I had it, like 10 million people bought The Love
Below/Speakerboxxx, but I couldn’t make 500,000 people make buy you guys’
record.” So their logical response was to sort of just let us of into the
slaughter by ignoring us. So there was a lot of this going on, like [takes a
pillow, holds it in front of the interviewer], “You are not here.” And we we
were like, “Hello, we are here [waving behind the pillow / laughs], can you
help us?” So we wrote a letter, we wrote two letters. We wrote a letter to
Shawn Carter, who was about to take the president position at Def Jam, and we
wrote Jimmy a letter and we just put it in logical terms. We said, “Look, if
we go, you are not going to miss us. You still got your 15 platinum acts over
there, just let us quietly go. We are not going to slander you in the press
and all that stuff [chuckles].” Well, this is the first time I am speaking
about it. “Can we transfer to another Universal label?” I think, because of
the guilt of fumbling our brand name, what we worked so hard for 12 years, I
think, because of the guilt had hit him so much that they let us go without
[any problems]. Normally, to get transferred, you know, George Michael made a
stinker, “I want off Sony Records,” and he had to pay zillions and zillions
of dollars. Artist do it all the time, they do some sabotage and shit to make
sure that [the label will drop you], you know, Prince did it. They let us go
in a very quick expedience, eight months, but it could have been years, I
could have been sitting here, crying about “they won’t let us go.” So we are
basically back at square one. Which is a good thing and a scary thing. It has
definitely made me wiser that this actually is being a business, and these are
the things I want our fanbase to know. I just don’t want them to think that we
thought, “Hm, you know what would be dope? If we get a song that sounds like
50 Cent, let’s get inside of a Porsche car,” that type of thing. A lot of the
decisions that we made for that particular record was definitely based on the
energy of us being on Interscope, which is the equivalent of you trying to
cross the street on a highway and every car, just trying to cross the street
on an autobahn, and cars are going 200 miles an hour. You too would be
careful, make sure that you are not going to get ran over. But we didn’t get
ran over, we just got nicked.
Monk One 
And yet you still managed to throw in treats in that album. I mean, the hidden
tracks, the “Din-Da-Da.”
Questlove 
Yeah, I was not going to make it totally a Jimmy Iovine record. I mean,
really, because it was a short record of ten songs, two songs out of the ten
does seem like a major, drastic, “Oh man, these guys done a total turnaround
thing.” But minus the two songs that we felt we needed to get Interscope’s
energy wrapped up and excited about us... it is still very much a Roots album,
you know?
Monk One 
It’s really important to have the record company behind what you are doing. It
is not just you are going to create a product, it is going to be good and
stand on its own legs and run.
Questlove 
That’s why it’s important for mom-and-pop labels to exist, because you are not
going to get the hands-on care, there is nothing to lose when you are one of
an empire of winners, if you want to say winners and losers. There is just
nothing to lose, the energy is different. A lot of the people there are so scared to
do anything. They talk behind their backs, they apologize a lot [fakes a
call], “Look, we’re really sorry, we are going to cut your budget in half. I know
that you need this budget but we are going to cut it in half, please don’t be
mad at us, they are making us do it. We can’t talk to you, bye.” [hangs
up / laughs] You know, that type of thing. [laughter] Some of them have to
get outside to deliver bad news [fakes a call], “OK, look, we got your video
budget, but it is only five dollars.” [laughter] It was a lot of that going
on.
Monk One 
I want to change it up a little bit from The Roots and get into some of the
musical background and people who have influenced you. I would say essential
listening. If you could pick a handful essential sources, and then production-
wise hip-hop producers?
Questlove 
You mean as a drummer?
Monk One 
Yeah, as a drummer.
Questlove 
As a drummer I disappoint people so many times. Sometimes in periodicals I’ll
name the right names. I say Tony Williams. I mean, I do love Tony Williams and Clyde
Stubblefield and John ‘Jabo’ Starks. But I think it’s strange that probably the three of my biggest
influences on drums are not drummers at all, but I consider them to be like
the greatest drummers. Stevie Wonder is not by any stretch of the imagination
a drummer first. He is a songwriter, piano player, but there is such an
intensity and such a passion in his work between the Where I’m Coming From
LP of ‘71 all the way up until, I’d say, Hotter Than July, before he totally
went drum machine crazy. Eddie
Kramer told me this, Eddie Kramer
was part of the Talking Book record and the Music Of My Mind album, both
were recorded at Electric Lady Studios in New York. And Stevie would sometimes
do the tracks individually. He would do the kick and the snare alone, and then
he would add the hi-hat later, and then he would add the tom-toms, and the
fills, and all that individually at the time. But there is something about his
hi-hat work on Music Of My Mind. Back when Tony Williams was a drummer for
the Miles Davis Quintet, he was very visual with his cymbal work. Most
drummers pick the actual drums to make their mark. But Tony Williams was a
cymbal guy, he was very violent, very colorful, and Stevie Wonder took that
same approach with his cymbal work. If you listen to the first song of Music
Of My Mind, “Love Having You
Around” that’s one of the most
horrendous, horrible, sloppy hi-hat playing ever. But that shit spoke to me
as a four-year old, [plays air cymbals] “tch, tch tch,” very violent
sounding. I became very obsessed with that sound, that violent hi-hat sound.
There is only one song in hip-hop that is just as violent with hi-hats. If you
listen to how the Bomb Squad chopped up Kool & The Gang’s “Let The
Music Take Your Mind”, the drum solo for Ice Cube’s “Amerikkkas Most
Wanted.” And the way they
compress that hi-hat sound, I have been trying to recreate that sound, it is
the most stupendous, like crazy sound. But as a hi-hat player Stevie Wonder
has definitely influenced what I do on the hi-hat. I don’t know why, but I
just found myself thinking of him when I’m drumming in the studio. Another
drummer, there is four altogether, there is a proper drummer, Steve
Ferrone from the
Average White Band. I mean, he can do no wrong in my book. Steve Ferrone is
the funkiest drummer to me, ever. He is very clean with his work.
Monk One 
What should people go and check out specifically?
Questlove 
If you buy the live album, it’s called Person To
Person, it’s a
double CD, LP, I’m 35 so I still listen to records, Steve Ferrone’s work on
the Average White Band’s albums are all crazy. But that particular album,
that’s the album I practiced to, three to five hours a day, every day in my
parent’s house in the basement from when I got my first set in ‘78, ten years
straight. That’s the album I would jam to.
Monk One 
Also, sampled by A Tribe Called Quest for “Check The Rhyme.”
Questlove 
Oh yeah, so look for the Average White Band. Steve Ferrone is the proper
drummer that I will give that credit to for being my influence. Prince is
another non-drummer that was very influential on me. Again, he was very
sloppy. His work on the Dirty Mind record, he always pushed the rhythm.
Whereas an average drummer would just play a traditional [beatboxes a straight
Rhythm], he would always push [beatboxes off beat rhythm], it was always off
beat. But I was obsessed with being off beat, off rhythm. I don’t know why
because of the human touch or whatever. Not to mention he is definitely one of
the pioneers of really good drum programming. Even though Herbie Hancock had
one of the first Linn Drums for his work, and of course, the Talking Heads,
David Byrne did a lot of work with computerized drums, but I definitely know
that Prince had one of the first models, he still has it in the studio. When
we did the Electric Circus record Prince graciously let us use Paisley Park
for a few sessions. I went in the basement and sure enough all this stuff was
still intact, and we used some of the stuff. But I didn’t know that that was a
drum machine because his programming was so syncopated, I was thinking that
just one drummer played all his stuff. So for two years straight I would think
if he took “777-9311”, a song
that has a very complex, near Weather Report-ish hi-hat pattern, that no human
being can really do…
Monk One 
That’s the Time.
Questlove 
Yeah, the Time, but I mean, it’s also Prince.
Monk One 
For those taking notes at home.
Questlove 
Yeah. For those, Prince was the kind of guy that would live vicariously
through his side projects. So, if he wanted to express the black side of
himself it was Morris Day and The Time, for which he did all the music, wrote
all the lyrics, did everything but the lead vocals, which was Morris Day, but
essentially those were Prince albums. He said that the Vanity 6 records were
the feminine side of himself. So anything that would come out of the Prince
camp, he did everything. So yeah, I was very obsessed with Prince’s drum work
on the Dirty Mind record and the 1999 record not knowing that that stuff
was drum machines. Thinking that a human being that I had to perfect myself to,
to think that way. And later when I found out that it was a drum machine, I was
disappointed but I was actually happy that, OK, now I know how to play like a
drum machine. The whole aspect of when people say, “Oh, you sound like a
drum machine,” that’s where the Prince part comes in. And lastly, probably my
biggest influence, the one person that programs drum machines, but he sounds
human, but is sloppy as I don’t know what, but is so perfect with his
execution, is [J Dilla][https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/02/dilla-life-is-a-donut-feature],
the creator of the music for Slum Village. Pretty much who should be sitting
on this couch right now. The way that he programs his music, I can’t even
explain it to people. One day, I am pretty sure I will be able to come up with words to explain to people what makes in my eyes him one of the greatest drum programmers of
all time. And people look at me like, “Blasphemy! What? There is
[Premier][/lectures/dj-premier-you-know-my-steez], there is Pete
Rock, there is...” you know? But I will debate it like it is a presidential
debate, I will campaign for that guy till the end of the time. He is one of
the greatest influences on my personal style of drumming, and he is a drum
programmer. I wish I could find the stuff, it is somewhere in the storage,
when we were working on the Things Fall Apart record and the Common record,
I was just recording [pretends to hold a camera] for hours just to see what
his techniques were. The fact that he believes in dynamics, the average
producer cat will just take a record, if it is a drum break he will take the first
kick he hears, the first snare he hears, the first hi-hat he hears, and that’s
it. Chops it up and does a beat. If it is a drum break for 32 bars, J would
take like nine snares, nine kicks, nine hi-hats, because each of them has a different
dynamic. But he is so quick with it. I have never seen someone who is so in
tune to what he is doing. He told me that [Amp
Fiddler][/lectures/amp-fiddler-turn-up-the-amp] of Funkadelic
fame and of his own right taught him how to program. So those three are my
biggest [influences].
Monk One 
And is he using quantizing?
Questlove 
No. Umm, yes and no. For the most part he has the ability to program drums
without using any type of quantizing or perfecting his kicks, which, if you
listen to his ‘95 work, probably his most popular work is “Runnin’” by The
Pharcyde. Just the kicks, where he decided to place them, that’s something a
real drummer would do. And that’s what spoke to me, like, “Man, is this a real
drummer? I thought they hired a drummer to play that stuff. Why didn’t they hire me? I
could have done that.” [chuckles] “No, it’s a programmer, his name is Jay
Dee.” So Tip finally, Q-Tip who was Jay Dee’s mentor, the one that put him
onto the game, finally introduced me to him, and then it was over. Then the
D’Angelo record and all that stuff came along, so...
Monk One 
Can you take us through the making of Voodoo briefly?
Questlove 
It’s going to be a nine hour... No, I will make it quick. I know
you guys are getting tired.
Monk One 
I mean, because that was a chance to make something different, really. And it
seems, that you must have seen yourself in a different role as far as that
unit, The Soulquarians, and all that.
Questlove 
Yeah, D’Angelo and I, we briefly met when I was making Do You Want More?,
and he was making Brown Sugar. The engineer of both those records, [Bob
Power][/lectures/bob-power-it-always-takes-longer], had told me like,
“Yo, you should really get on this guy’s record. He is really, he is the one,
he is the one.” And I was stupid, I made up some flimsy excuse, I think I
wanted to go play pool, and I was supposed to play on two songs on Brown
Sugar. I was supposed to play on “Smooth” and... no three: “Smooth,”
“Higher” and “Shit, Damn, Motherfucker”. And initially, Ron
Carter was going to
play bass on “Shit, Damn, Motherfucker,” but because of his Christian beliefs
the song title sort of turned him off [audience chuckles], so he cancelled
the session. And when Ron Carter, like that was the joint thing, like, “Oh,
Ron Carter is going to do it, OK, I will do it.” And when Ron didn’t do it, I
was like, “Oh, I have got some other stuff to do.” I think I just lied, I went
to play pool or something like that. I missed a chance to be on a classic
record, but I actually think, it was all for the best, because I wouldn’t
change nothing, I wouldn’t change a thing. D went to go see us perform at
the House of Blues in Los Angeles in April of ‘96, back when we were on with
the Fugees and Goodie Mob. And by then I’d become a D’Angelo fanatic, because
that was the first time that I ever heard somebody sing over music that could
have been easily been A Tribe Called Quest, or music that I liked, because R&B music had become so watered down and crap, that I just thought hip-hop
was the only music with real soul into it. And so here he comes. So I used my
Roots show as an audition and a lot of my band members were wondering, “Why
the hell is he playing drums like that?” And I just changed my whole drumming
sound for that one show. I was like, “OK, you like Tribe, you like Jay Dee, I
am going to play just like that.” That was the first time in a Roots show that
I started to do the stuff that I am doing now. Playing more sloppy and more
crazy in my approach. I saw a silhouette on the balcony, that’s all I saw
[nods his head]. I was like, “As long as he is doing that, he’s cool, he’s
cool.” So after the show he was like, “Yo man, I didn’t know that a real
drummer can sound like a drum machine, you sound just like Jay Dee.” He [D’Angelo] and I are the Jay Dee disciples, you know? So, how I felt about Jay
Dee, that’s how he felt about Jay Dee as well, his drum programming and the
whole thing. Once I told him, like I was just communicating with him, that
was the language, like I, too, know Jay Dee, this is our secret language. We
are the only two people in America who have record deals and probably care
about this thing, and we speak the same language. So what’s up? And after the
tour ended in August we invited him to sing on the Illadelph Halflife
record, which I’m sure he only accepted, so that way he can see how he could
further utilize me into his masterplan. Because we only spent eight hours on
the “Hypnotic” song for The Roots album. And on the next two days we started
working on Voodoo, of which we didn’t do much talking. We spent the first
day probably just testing each other’s knowledge on, “OK, let’s see if we can
out-Prince each other.” So then, that became the process of Voodoo. Like,
we literally would take what we call the Yoda figures. The Yoda figures were the wise all-knowing masters of whatever music that we were into, Hendrix, [George] Clinton, James
[Brown], Stevie [Wonder], Prince. Literally, for the next five years we were
just going through their discography. And if something stuck, then we started
working on a song. So, for instance, for Prince, there is a song called
“Africa” that ends D’Angelo’s album. It took us about five hours to get to
“Africa.” We literally went
through every Prince song. We went from the For You record, nothing, took a
break. Came back to the Prince record, nothing, came back to the Dirty
Mind record, Controversy, 1999, Purple Rain, Around The World In A
Day, Parade. As soon as we got to the third song on Parade, which is called
“I Wonder U” [pretends to play drums], he was like “Yo, keep on playing
that beat.” And I just kept on playing that beat. I mean, we were slow as
molasses, slower than the answer I’m giving you now. I think, maybe half an
hour later, and that’s the thing, now I am lazy about it, because now there
is ProTools and easier ways to execute it. I just tell the engineer, “Loop
these four bars,” and I can play something for four bars, and then he will
loop it, I can take a break, and he can play with it. But back then I was the
ProTools, I had to play the beat over and over and over again. And he just sat
there [pretends to play piano], and then he discovered something. And next
thing you know, that’s how “Africa” got born. And then pretty much for the
“Chicken Grease” song we went through every Ohio Players, Westbound,
the earlier Ohio Players. We went through every song on Pain, every song on
Pleasure, every song on Climax, and then, all of a sudden, from the
Ecstasy album - no, no, I’m sorry, the Pain record, we were doing “Never
Had A Dream” and there is a drum break in “Never Had A Dream” that Brand
Nubian used for “Slow Down,” a very stoic sounding break record, the cymbal
sound had broken, and I had to get some duck tape and duck-taped up the cymbal.
And next thing you know he said, “Aha, stay on that!” Initially, Common was
going to take it, and D gave me that wink, like, “You know I’m keeping
that, right?” And I had to go outside and explain to Common, “Look, D says
he will give you one of his songs and you give him this song.” You know,
that’s the type of environment that it was in Electric Lady. We were all living
in the studio, it was like a commune, and every day was something different,
you know? Spending the night there was one big ass, it was a sleep over for
five years. It was me, D’Angelo, Erykah was always there, Common was always
there, Mos, Talib, Jay Dee, James Poyser and every week it would be
something new. Like, Q-Tip would always bring in like a luminary, like he
would bring in Russ Titelman, the guy who produced the Doobie Brothers and stuff. He’d tell us
stories, and, you know, maybe I come back from a tour from Japan, I have a
whole bunch of Soul Train tapes, and we sit there and we watch it. It was a
24-hour affair. One of the hardest things about the Voodoo record was
stopping it, because it was like graduating high school. It was like, “Well,
this is the last song. Are we going to see each other again? And what are we
going to do?” It was like a sad thing to finish that record, but that was the
greatest period. Some of the music and the stuff that we did between 1995 and
2000 was some of the best years of my life, ever.
Monk One 
So there has got to be a lot of that has yet to come out.
Questlove 
Reels. Right now, I’m scoring... Dave Chappelle shot a documentary, so to speak. Dave Chappelle and Michel Gondry of Eternal Sunshine Of The Spotless Mind fame,
we sort of redid the Wattstax thing. For those who don’t know, Wattstax
was a film that came out in ‘73, that featured Al Bell and his array of
artists that were on Stax Records, they gave a concert. We recreated the
spirit of that by doing a show in Brooklyn, September 2004, with Kanye…
Basically the Illadelphonics, the group of super-musicians that I put
together for the Jay-Z event. We backed up Kanye, The Roots, Jill, Erykah,
Dead Prez and The Fugees, the reunited Fugees. So we’re scoring that right
now, but we’re doing it at Electric Lady in the C-room. And I went into one of
the storage base rooms and, sure enough, there’s like over 400-plus 2” reels of just
Voodoo. Day #49, you know, some 1997, Day #153, the Stevie Wonder stuff. I
don’t know who would necessarily be interested in just us jamming, but there
is at least over 200 hours of us just going crazy because by that point we
were using 2” reels as our DATs. An average person just puts the DAT on, a
cassette on, and just jams. But he didn’t want to miss a damn thing, so
pretty much we had two 2” reels going constantly. Some of the stuff is just
conversation like: “What did you do with that girl last night?” “Yo, man, she
was bad. Oh wait, is this on tape? Fuck it. Anyway, so the three of them came
into my bedroom, right?” Anyway, so it’s like that. It’s still up there, and I
don’t know, I guess they’re going to maybe transfer it to ProTools to protect
it or something, I don’t know.
Monk One 
I remember at the time when that Block Party, the Brooklyn event that you were
talking about, when that jumped off, it was a big deal because The Fugees
where reuniting.
Questlove 
Would they show up or wouldn’t they show up? I didn’t know that, yeah, we
didn’t know, like, the scariest thing was whether or not, even with the
Fugees, so basically, will Lauryn show up? And, you know, David wanted to
create an atmosphere, he was at the peak of his powers by that point, he
figured probably the best thing that he could do with the peak of his powers is
to expose the world to the hip-hop that he listens to. Which... he really didn’t
have to do that, you know what I mean, but the fact that he was willing to do
that was a beautiful thing, and he used his resources to get some of the best
people to shoot it. The fact that Michel Gondry, one of my favourite directors
in video and movies, the fact that he is directing it and that Dave has pulled
all these people in to make this event special, it was one of the greatest
weeks ever. It felt like we were back at Electric Lady all over again, you
know? The first night, like all 19, well, 17/18, combine all the acts, we were
all on a conference call, and cracking jokes at each other, and that type of
thing, and trying to figure out what we wanted to do. Like, they wanted us to
do Wattstax with each other. I wanted Jill Scott to do a song with Common, I
wanted Dead Prez to do a song with these people, mix and match, and all that
stuff. And at the end it was brilliant because no one in New York
even suspected something like that happening, and the fact that we pulled it
off without a hitch - and the way it’s depicted in the movie, it’s not a
concert film. I mean, the narrative is basically Dave in his native Ohio,
outside of Dayton, going around like he is doing this Willy Wonka thing, where
he is handing out golden tickets to various people and flying them and bussing
them to Brooklyn to see this concert, and it’s brilliant [puts his thumb
up]. So, we’re trying to rush it now, I’m scoring it now. I know that we want
to get it ready for Cannes, because I know that, I’m
sorry, Cannes, we’re trying to do it for all the
film festivals, and I know that we will either do some sort of tour thing
behind it or that type of thing.
Monk One 
Who is going to be touring behind it?
Questlove 
Pretty much everyone who’s seen the film is very excited about it. So I
know that the majority of the acts, Fugees included, like they are still on
the road right now, I think they are in Europe, doing some spot dates, but I
think everyone is pretty much in agreement that we should try and execute this
across the United States, so people can see, you know?
Monk One 
And have you finished, have you all wrapped up the next Roots studio album?
Questlove 
Yeah, it’s called Game Theory, and it’s our first Def Jam release. It’s a return to form,
well, coming after The Tipping Point, I guess anything is a return to form
[laughs]. So yeah, it is a return to form, so to speak. I don’t know, I had
this obsession with trying to match or do something Bomb Squad-y. Bomb Squad,
the Hank Shocklee
collective led Bomb Squad that produced the Public Enemy and Ice Cube records.
So right now in its current state it’s very musical, it’s dark, it’s fast, I
don’t know what to call this record. Right now, I’m saying it’s the political
record, only because of Tariq’s narrative, it’s definitely the most anti-MC
album that he has executed as of late. Last time I checked there is zero songs
about his “lyrical prowess,” which, that is a big step
for him, to a sort of peel those layers away. I think there’s only so many
ways that you can say your prowess on the microphone and actually speak to the
people. So, I guess, in the steps of him actually revealing who he is, this is
what I will call the political record.
Monk One 
So when you say political, is there political commentary on it? Has it been
influenced by the events that have been going on in the last couple of years?
Questlove 
I think, because of where he is, I know that he was deeply affected by the
events in Katrina, because his first born, Ahmir, lives in New Orleans. So
that was affecting him personally, because it’s one thing to sit there and
watch CNN, and to see what’s going on the television screen and, “Oh man,
that’s messed up. [looks away] Give me the remote.” With him it was, “OK, I
can’t find my son, I can’t find my son, I can’t...” A lot of just of what has
affected his son has somehow affected Tariq and it’s really coming out into his
lyrical content now.
Monk One 
Is that something you feel worth comfortable with including in the sound of
the album of The Roots?
Questlove 
I think it’s cool, only because it’s really going to give me an excuse to do
something darker. I don’t know why, I don’t know where I am in my life right
now that I’m just obsessed with darker-sounding stuff. Maybe it’s just
something in me that really just wants to make something that feels like
something from the Bomb Squad era. The closest I got to that was doing the
“Thought At Work” song on Phrenology, but that was just one song. I want to
make it a whole album that sort of fits that parameter of darkness, and playing
with sounds, and that type of thing.
Monk One 
One of the big elements of Bomb Squad was the layering of samples. Are you
using samples like that?
Questlove 
Nah, right now it’s just not cost-efficient for us to use samples like that.
I’m sure they will utilize it. I know that we’re, now more than ever, we’re
going to try and incorporate also J Dilla on this record, try to get a lot
of production work out of him, because I think it’s a travesty that people
don’t know the extent and the range of his work. So, if there is any sampling
involved, it will be probably in the work that he contribute to either where
we recreate the samples or amalgamate the two together, or that type of thing.
Monk One 
OK, [looks at his watch], let’s see where we’re at.
Questlove 
I know, it’s like midnight, right? Sorry, wake up people! [audience
Chuckles]
Monk One 
Alright, I want to give the people out there, everybody here a chance to
speak, and I’d like to open it up. So if anyone has something that they like to
say or ask Ahmir.
Questlove 
They look like they need Red Bull.
Monk One 
[chuckles] Let’s get some Red Bull going.
Questlove 
I think I covered everything.
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
You mentioned earlier the band that you put on for a certain Shawn Carter gig.
How did that come together, the unplugged thing?
Questlove 
OK, well, let me get this right, because she gets mad at me every time I leave
her out the story. There’s a writer, dream hampton, that’s a very good friend
of mine. She was one of the main writers of The Source magazine, back when it
was The Source. But we pretty much hold her dear to her tastemaker abilities.
The fact that she can recommend something and actually execute it, make it
happen. So, Jay had mentioned to her that in order to do Saturday Night Live
in the fall of 2000, he needed a band. And so she said, “There’s only one
group of musicians that can even fit that bill.” The problem was that we were
on tour at that time, but he’d never let up on the idea that maybe we should
work with each other. I was a little shocked in the beginning, because during
that time period the apartheid system in hip-hop, like the have and have-nots
going against each other, and of course, I know that they look at us like we
are minions, “You guys are nobody, you backpackers, you’re underground,”
you know? I was shocked that he wanted to work with us, but then after working
with him in the ongoing age of irony thing, you will be very shocked when
the truth is revealed, who is what in the world of music and just life in
general. And at the end of the day, he’s one of the most professional people I
have ever worked with. One of the more nicer, less high-maintenance people I
ever worked with. You would figure that the side of music that I represent,
that we are supposed to be the kindler, gentler, politically correct,
not high-maintenance, not... That’s a lie. I’m not getting into specifics, but
I can give you many a nightmare story about my so-called “side of the fence.” All the people who are supposed to be on my side of the
fence, that you would think would be a Mariah Carey, or just something in the
land of being high-maintenance. But with him, very normal cat, you know? He
was open to ideas and just the fact that he was open, the fact that he
answered questions, answers questions, asked questions! I’m sorry, I need Red
Bull. [audience chuckles] Just the fact that he asked questions and wanted
to call me at 11, like, “How can we make this better? Do you
think we should take this song out and do “Heart Of The City”? Or should we
do...?” There wasn’t a point where I thought, “OK, your audience is going to
be totally thrown off when they get a load of this one.” Like, it never even
hit me until maybe a day after that it finally leaked on the Internet that,
“The Roots do something with Jay-Z?! Oh my god!” It looked like the world was
going to turn on its stomach. But I wasn’t worried because I knew that as long
as they let me have a final say on the mix that it was going to be
bulletproof. And when I looked at the final product, and I mixed it down, and [nods his head] it got the nod-factor-approval of everyone in the studio, I
knew it was Teflon. Like, there is no way that you’re going to criticize, even
if you are the staunchest Jay-Z hater at all, like there’s no way that you
with a straight face were going to say [half-hearted], “Alright, maybe
that’s OK. OK, I’m feeling this.” You know, I wanted to make it bulletproof.
And since then we’ve been cool, socially cool.
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Who came up with the change of the music in “Take Over” on that concert?
Questlove 
Me. Sorry [laughs]!
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Is that going back to the days when you were playing out in the streets just
mimicking things?
Questlove 
Oh, yeah. Again, I think I was so caught up in the moment that I didn’t even
think that, “Oh god, Nas and Mobb Deep might actually catch feelings towards
us doing this,” you know? It was just like, “Yo, when we get to
the Nas thing then we should change the music up!” And you know, “We get to
the Mobb Deep, we should change up the music!” I did it in rehearsal, and then I
thought about it, and I said, “Oh no, we shouldn’t do it.” He had just walked
in one-minute later and he said, “Yo, you were just doing the “Oochie Wally”
on it?” And we said, “Yeah, we were doing it.” And he said, “Yo, you should
just do that.” And I was like, “Nah, we [hesitates] that’s too much.” And
by that point I had realized that, OK, we could really be putting extra
gasoline on the fire, and by that point he was like, “Nah, man, I have got to
have it, I have got to have it. Do that music when I’m dissin’ him!” And then
[covers his eyes], “Yeah, you know, I did it, so...”
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Add some ether to the fire.
Questlove 
Yeah, I’d accidentally suggested that, and we have since then made up with Nas
and Mobb Deep, so it’s all water under the bridge.
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Before I pass this one on, one thing that strikes a lot of people is, how do
you guys keep the joy in playing? Because you’ve been known, especially during
the Organix, Do You Want More? phase, for playing hours and hours and hours of
concerts. And obviously, now you have got to protect yourself and your mental
and physical sanity at some stage with all those tours you are describing. How
do you balance that out over the years?
Questlove 
Erm, we have different tour buses [laughs]. Actually, I think I kind of misled people in thinking that we were
sort of like a Phish or the String Cheese Incident or, ah, who were the guys who I
had to wear a bear suit one night, when I have seen those guys?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Ween?
Questlove 
That’s funny. I know the cast of characters...
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Flaming Lips.
Questlove 
Yeah, Flaming Lips, thank you. The first time I have seen them he was like,
“Yo, put this bear suit on.” And I put it on, I don’t know what the fuck I was
doing, and then I had to go out and dance with the bear suit on [laughter].
But those guys do different shows every night, I want to get to that point,
like, I don’t want to ever mislead people into thinking that The Roots show
is different every night. It’s not different every night, but for us to keep
our sanity, I will change 30% of the show. Maybe I’m bored and it also depends
on the location. Like, if we are in Finland, not saying that, OK, well, we’ll
pull the wool over people’s eyes over in Scandinavia and just do like a waltz
version of “Proceed”, or do a polka version of “Mellow My Man.” But, I mean,
we’ll do more adventurous things the further away we are from our home base. So
actually, some of the better Roots shows come from the most secluded places on
earth. Like, when we went to Perth in Australia, which I think is probably the most secluded cities in the history of the world, I think I actually
did some stand-up comedy [audience chuckles], like we were doing
everything-but-the-kitchen-sink on that particular show. So we switch it up,
just so that those songs don’t get stale to us night after night after night
after night. And socially there is three tour buses to choose from. So, if
you’re mad, because someone drank your soy-milk, or down the last of the Cap’n
Crunch... [laughter] Oh, don’t laugh. Yo, like there has been major
pugilistic actions over many, many, many a Cap’n Crunch box, then you just can
go on another bus, you know?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
But the way you picture this with the scenario you found yourselves in here in
America, it almost seems there is a certain fear of incorporating the same
kind of stand-up acts in a show in New York or in Philly or in Chicago as in
Perth.
Questlove 
We are just more serious when we are in the United States. I don’t know why, I
think it’s just the hip-hop thing. Hip-hop is such a machismo, such a very
serious-stance thing, and even a group as perceived or as vulnerable as The
Roots are perceived to be, you know, sometimes we do [leans forward in an
offensive manner] have our moments, where we are crossing every ‘t’ and dotting every ‘i’. It really just depends. I mean, if you are in Chicago and you’re
playing, and you look to the side, and all of a sudden Kanye West and his six
buddies are watching your show, then that’s going to call something different
in you, than whereas you’re in Lyon, France, and there’s a girl doing a silly
dance on the side. And all of a sudden you bring her on stage, and the next
you know... I mean, it just really depends on the setting. America is just a
more “serious place.”
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Hi, you’ve mentioned something about working with Michel Gondry, and since he
is one of my favorite directors I just wanted to ask something more about his
approach on doing scores for films and something like that.
Questlove 
He would love for you to say that because I talked to Michel a lot, and I
thought I was the only artist who really tries to downplay or beats himself down for
whatever his place is in the pantheon of the world of music. But he is even
worse than me. To talk to him, you would think that Eternal Sunshine would be
a C-film, or next to the porno-section [audience chuckles] or something. He
has to make a film that will stand up in the light of the French community
that he respects, you know? And he is like, “I used Jim Carrey, and French
people look down at me because you used that American clown actor Jim Carrey
in your film,” and da-da-da. I mean, we talk a lot. First of all, he is a
drummer [laughs]. So he’s always calling me up. Actually, I don’t know, are you
familiar with MC Paul Barman?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Yeah, I’ve heard, but, I mean, just to get back to his drumming part. There is
a part, a really good part about his drumming on his DVD. I don’t know if you
checked it out.
Questlove 
Nah, nah. Well, he told me about it, I didn’t see it yet, but him and Paul
Barman, I actually introduced those two at a Labor Day cookout at my spot in
Brooklyn. I introduced these two to each other and they now have a group
together and they have recorded six songs. So Michel really wants to be a
drummer, and if you know Paul Barman, he is just crazy already. But, as far as
his approach was, I have just never met a more confident filmmaker ever. He
just says, “Trust me.” And it’s funny, when we were having that conference
call discussion between the 19 others, it was like Dave, Michel and all the
artists, Michel just said, “I just want you people to trust me, and believe
that I will make this a beautiful experience.” And some of us had questions,
Jill was like, “I just want to make sure that you shoot my good side,” and da-
da-da-da. And, “What are we going to have to do?”, and da-da-da. And after a
half hour of these questions Mos said, “Wait everybody, I think that we are
getting away from the point here. You have to understand this man is from
France [audience chuckles]. For God’s sake, this country gave us the best
baguettes ever, that’s enough to trust him [laughs].” That’s Mos’s theory on
why we should trust the French. But he did a beautiful job, that’s all I can
say. He just wrote a treatment for one of our singles from the Game Theory
record. I have to see how far this trust is going to go because this is
probably the most radical thing that I’ve ever had to do, but I’m going to
trust him, so we’ll see how long that goes, you know?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Here is just a quick question. You’ve been in in Vancouver, maybe up a month
ago for the Hip-Hop Expo. My boys went to pick you up at the airport, and were
expecting vinyl, and you showed up with the laptop and the software. When did
that change, or what’s your kind of theory towards not using vinyl but coming from the laptop?
Questlove 
Well, my back started killing me [laughter]. No, DJ Jazzy
Jeff and DJ Rectangle, they are my traffic signal for whether something’s cool
or not. Like, at one point the big controversy was using the CDJ-1000, like,
“Is it safe, is it not safe?” And then Jazzy Jeff and Rectangle like [puts his
thumb up] so everyone bought them off. So when Serato came out, like Jeff, I
didn’t even see it. Jeff called me and said, “Yo, run down to Armand’s and get
you a Serato.” And I was like, “Huh?”, and he said, “Just do what I say.” “OK”
[whistles / laughter]. I don’t even know what a Serato was, and I
handed it to him and said, “This is it?” And like, “Trust me, Jeff has the
other one. You have the last one. And you’re going to have the last one until
a month from now.” Serato actually enables me to pack in more and more songs
than before. One of the problems I had with touring with my vinyl, was that
something would always get destroyed. During the Okayplayer 2000 tour, our
equipment truck spilled over in Denver, and one of my records, I was spinning
an original Headless Heroes Of The Apocalypse by Eugene McDaniels, a
record that I paid $300 for, snapped. And ever
since then that was when my whole theory of [playing strictly vinyl] changed.
I was a purist like everyone, play the original wax, let them see the 45 of
“Impeach The President” and all
that stuff. But then I realized that was wearing and tearing all my records
apart, travelling from country to country, getting abused and that type of
stuff. Of course, this is the age-old debate of “keeping
it pure” or rolling with the punches and technology, but I don’t know, this
definitely makes my workload easier. I don’t have to lug nine crates around
the world, and there’s still three crates worth of records somewhere, and where’s
that Paris airport? Erm, De Gaulle, yeah, it’s still over there right now
[imitates airport service], “Oh, we don’t know where it is, Mr. Thompson,
we’re sorry.” So, that’s why I use Serato. So it’s not just “a computer,” it’s technology.
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I want to talk about “The Seed” record. It is probably one of the biggest hits
you’ve had I guess, one of the closest to mainstream. It’s also one of the
biggest, heaviest spaced-out production on it, that came out maybe in the Top
40 records in a long time. How did that happen?
Questlove 
“The Seed”, ahm...
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Especially, since the original is quite a sober and lo-fi affair by Cody
ChesnuTT.
Questlove 
Yeah, again, dream hampton, the muse of us all, I did a show in Detroit, and
she had a demo of Cody ChesnuTT, of which she wouldn’t reveal to me who it
was. Then we made a gasoline stop, and while she was inside paying for gas, I
ejected the CD real quickly, and so Cody ChesnuTT The Headphone Masterpiece,
I wrote it down, and then I went on my website that night and said, “Have any
of you guys ever heard of a guy named Cody ChesnuTT The Headphone
Masterpiece?” No one on my website had heard of him, but someone else
associated with Cody had seen the post on my website, contacted his
management, who then contacted my record label, who subsequently have rejected
Cody, because then my record label called me up and said, “Hey, you made a
post about this guy named Cody ChesnuTT.” I was in the office. “You mean this
guy?”, and they reached the throw-away demo pile. It was like, “This guy?” And
I said, “Yeah, that’s him, that’s the CD!” And they said, “You want this guy?”
And I said, “Yeah!” And they were just shocked, they were really shocked,
like, “Ah, his music is really horrible,” and da-da-da-da-da. I don’t know
what made me gravitate towards Cody at all, like, I think that a lot of black
people’s experience with rock music has to do with the MTV experiences most of
us had. Like, if we wanted to watch “Thriller” or a Prince video in 1982/83
we had to sit there and sit through countless and countless and countless of
the videos that they were showing on MTV, which were pretty much like hard
rock. So, when I thought of hard rock then it was like Led Zeppelin’s
“Fooling” [imitates parts of “Whole Lotta Love”] “F-f-f-f-f-f-f-fooling,
dada.” That was my idea of that’s rock. That was before I educated myself and
saw the different areas of it. But Cody’s approach to music was more Beatles,
Brian Wilson-esque. Like, his sense of melody and that type of stuff. So
that’s why I liked his demo. And then, when I heard “The Seed,” I just
thought, ‘OK, wow!’ By that point I felt The Roots were just going to be the
Moses of hip-hop, which was basically like we were just going to usher in
someone new. We ushered in Jill, “OK, go on, Jill!”, we ushered in Erykah,
like all these other people, like just ushered them through. So I figured, “OK,
well, we’ll cover one of his songs and introduce Cody to a whole new audience.” I
mean, no, I love this song, and I wouldn’t change anything about it, but Cody
was definitely one of those artists, that wasn’t ready for his spotlight. He’s
a very guarded, a very private person, very anti-industry. Not many people
know that he was signed at Death Row. I mean, Suge Knight had the vision, he and one of his managers wanted that rock money, he wanted rock ‘n’ roll money, he wanted white people’s money. And so he wanted to develop a label that was a subsidiary of Death Row Records, and Cody was his first artist. And they just laid in limbo for four or five years, and
Cody’s sort of got disenchanted and went back to his mother’s house in
Atlanta, and made this record that caught my ears in his mum’s house. I can
understand him being skeptical of, “OK, here comes success again, and it’s
going to play another nasty trick on me.” So I scratched my head that he
walked away from it, but I kind of applaud him, because he walked away from
it as well, so...
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
I just wanted to ask about, how you go about planning a set for The Roots in
terms of your song flow, and the dynamics between the musicians?
Questlove 
Song wise, or album wise, or...?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 
Live, like your show on stage.
Questlove 
Live? Now, my primary concern is that they don’t wear themselves out, because Tariq
is now the lone man. It was never like Malik was ever part of the live
ensemble, so that Tariq could catch a break, but you have to understand that,
because Tariq projects so much and puts so much effort into his words, and
when he is performing live, to bring that much text and that much energy for
that long period of time could be like overwhelming. And he has to do the
chorus and the verse, you know? It was one thing when Rahzel was in the group.
When it’s chorus time, Tariq gets a little 12 second break, drinks some water
[pretends to wipe the sweat from his face, exhales], regroups himself. Now,
that Rahzel is gone, and now that Scratch is gone, it’s all Tariq. So my
primary concern is wearing Tariq out, so I kind of pace the show. Like, OK,
this part is slow, or maybe we can do a little musical break here? So they
even catch a 30 second break. Hub might complain that, “These lights are too
hot,” or whatever. So let me get out of his solo first and then he gets to take a
break. Now I am thinking in terms of, I will take the most work on. I can do
three to four hours straight of drumming without complaining or whatever. So,
nine times out of ten, I’m just thinking about the four of them because if
they’re all bitching and complaining about, like, “The show is too long,
Ahmir,” and this type of stuff, I’ve got to Jedi mind trick them. I construct
the show by, “Who can take a break? OK, come on, you take a break. Let us work
out, and Hub, you take a break, let us work out, and OK, I do a drum solo
here, that’s 20 minutes,” [audience chuckles] and that type of thing. [asks
the audience] Anyone? Going once, going twice.
Monk One 
Anybody?
Questlove 
That’s it?
Monk One 
Alright. Yeah, thank you very much.
Questlove 
Thank you.
Monk One 
And thanks everybody.
[applause]
