Van Dyke Parks is an arranger and composer best known for writing the lyrics to a certain lost classic by the Beach Boys – but that’s not even the half of it. His first arranging job was on The Jungle Book (his addition, “The Bare Necessities,” scooped an Academy Award nomination); and back in the ’70s, he started the world’s first record-company video department at Warner Bros. In recent years, he’s woven his expressive arrangements around the music of Rufus Wainwright, St. Etienne, and Joanna Newsom, for whom he orchestrated her second album, 2006’s Ys. Parks’ music, by turns elegiac and psychedelic, stretches into the bygone age of a lost America and bursts into the wide-open plains of whatever he chooses to do next. 
In his 2013 Red Bull Music Academy, Parks delved into the art of arranging, the Smile sessions, his work with Skrillex, and much more.
BENJI B 
It really is an absolute special honor for us to be in the company of such a
musical wizard and legend. Please join me in welcoming the amazing Mr. Van
Dyke Parks.
Van Dyke Parks 
Well, I’m not the only wizard here. I know that we’re in a sea of wizardry. I
know that, and I appreciate it.
BENJI B 
So you selected that piece of music to kick things off today. What was it?
Van Dyke Parks 
There were 800 copies of a record just released for Record Store Day. And
that is in that record. It begins an album called The Super
Chief, which is to document my trip. An instrumental fantasy, as
it were to document my first trip to California in 1955, on the Super Chief,
the great luxury train. It took me three days to get from Princeton Junction
to Pasadena, California. And that was the first piece from that fantastic,
grandly irrelevant piece of music I wrote, called The Super Chief.
BENJI B 
And there’s definitely a cinematic theme in a lot of your arranging. One of
your first breaks was actually working in the movie business, am I right?
Van Dyke Parks 
 Well, I don’t know if you call that a break. It might have been better to
study engineering, or dentistry. But I chose music early and I went to a
boarding school in Princeton, New Jersey. Outside of Princeton. At that time
it was called the Columbus Boy Choir School. And I was immersed in music from
a very early age. I was the youngest of four boys. We all played instruments.
My first real instrument was clarinet. My brother played trumped, another
played French horn. The oldest played double-barrel euphonium. So we made a
racket at every Noel. We’d go around and we’d play our way through
neighborhoods and in sometimes freezing weather. I was the only one with a
wooden mouthpiece, so I felt rather superior and fortunate. If you’ve ever had
brass on your lips in a snowstorm, you know what I’m talking about. So music
was it. And to support that tuition, my father was a doctor. Much of his work
was for nothing but for the love of mankind, which I don’t think is a misspent
aim. We had to raise the tuition. And I came into New York City repeatedly, in
the ’50s, to support my education in music. And it’s all about music for me.
It’s the highest math. It’s what brings us together today. It leads to the
song form, the most portable piece of cultural baggage we can carry. We don’t
even have to pick it up. As long as it has melody, pardon me, a through-line,
it needn’t have melody. But sometimes it does, and when it does, it can escape
with you as you exit a room, with a fantastic and powerful memory. So I think
music is very butch. I love it. It brings musculature to my every social aim.
And sometimes it’s a velvet glove with a strong fist enclosed. Sometimes it’s
a consolation prize. But music has such potential to realize everything we
want of the human spirit. Let’s not be bothering Jesus with all this horse
shit, but you get what I’m saying here. I believe so heartily in music. So
those that are here that might suspect that it’s other than a glorious ride, I
guarantee you it’s worth it, as I enter my eighth decade. I swear to that.
BENJI B 
And one piece of music that definitely, I think it’s fair to say, brings us
all together in the room, because I would find it hard to believe that there’s
someone here that hasn’t been touched by this moment in their life, is one of
the very first things that you worked on.
(music: Terry Gilkyson - “The Bare
Necessities”)
Van Dyke Parks 
 Alright. That was 1963.
[applause]
1963, I got my first union job. That was the year... we had a Cold War. We had
been recovering from Nikita Khrushchev banging on his shoe on the dais of the
United Nations. We were in a Cold War. Unfortunately, my brother was in
Frankfurt, at the vice-consulate of Frankfurt. And he died that year. And to
get to his funeral, I got a job. And they gave me money to arrange that piece.
I got a black suit and a two-way ticket to the grave. And if that isn’t a
burning bush, if that isn’t God in action, I don’t know what the hell is. And
that was my first job. Basically, a glorified rhythm track, but it gave me the
idea that there was money in music. And that’s something I just found
phenomenal. So, 1963, that was the year Bob Dylan came out with his first
album, The Freewheelin’ Bob Dylan. That was the year The Rolling Stones co-opted the American delta blues in 12 x 5. That was a sea change in music.
That’s when everyman could sing. Sprechstimme [‘speaking voice’], the thing
that I’d learned as a child in the boy school, by people like Schoenberg, was
now on the street. Anybody could sing. If he could play a guitar, he could get
somewhere. And so I went from the coffeehouses that I’d played since ’62, I
went up and down the coast of California. I went into the studio and started
exploring the opportunities in a studio. And that really became my laughin’
place, the place that I loved to be. That’s where I wanted to remain. Because
I’d drawn a distinction between performance music and recorded music. I did
that in 1948. I was 5-years-old, and I heard a Spike Jones tune, called
“Cocktails For Two,” filled with
ear candy. Tuneful percussion. Things that I’d heard, like, only through
Sousa, on parades, as people
marched down the street in earshot on American holidays. Now it was in the
studio, and tuneful percussion became a very important obsession for me in
recording. It still is. You notice, with “The Bare Necessities,” you’re
hearing a room sound. You walk into a room and the people that – probably was
the first take – people look at music and they start playing together, and the
room sounds. Well, technology of music, and I’m just starting to talk about it
animated itself into a real sea change. Right about that time. About 1963,
’64, we went from three-track to four-track tape. It was a big deal. And I
knew there was a difference between recorded and live music. From going from a
piece where the room sounded to a piece in which you could impose different
perspectives on acoustic instruments. A mandolin might be triumphal in the
foreground, in the face, with a wall of brass blowing their brains out in the
background, because of micing. So, tell you the truth, I was at the right
place at the right time to participate in all that wondrous journey that
studio technology brought. And this hour, I figure, with your indulgence, I
will stammer my way through a discovery of where that led me. All kinds of
interesting places. That proves, once again, that production – that is, as a
credit – is a failure in engagement, in contrast to arrangement, and really
participating. Where you can define the proscenium of a piece. You can exalt
what is humble. You can articulate what seems to the casual observer like a
fuzzy, far-off event, as small as a YouTube download. So that’s the end of the
sentence.
[laughter]
BENJI B 
I think that sentence deserves a round of applause.
[applause]
So, obviously, we’re a room full of musically-minded people, from all
differing backgrounds of production and taste. But one thing that I would
really love you to expand on in today’s talk is what you just mentioned, which
is the art of arranging. And maybe while we navigate through that, you could
think of a few musical examples we could use to show, really, your experience
in arranging. And maybe talk us through the process of what being an arranger
is.
Van Dyke Parks 
 Well, music seems to me like a tremendous remedy. Almost like the last thing
on anybody’s mind. In film work, it’s the last thing done. In a vertical
hierarchy, all the money is spent on blowing dust around, making people up,
spending money on contracts, getting an extra trailer for a diva who just
didn’t want to be so close to her male co-star. Maybe falling out of love
during an embrace in a picture. All of those problems can only be reconciled
with music. So music is the great remedy to me. And it is also in arranging
for basic tracks. Real interesting to me that two things are involved in the
recording process, usually, although events now are stampeding ahead of me and
I am in a state of perpetual wonder about whether Spotify is spotless, what’s
happening to fractional profits in music and so forth, and how to position
myself as a mere survivor in this new era of music. I understand it far less
than anybody here. But in my experience, two things happen that are very
interesting in the equation of arranging. An extemporaneous process might meet
head-on with a pre-meditated event. So you might come up with a bass, drums,
and guitar, and a vocal, that need somehow to be – pardon me – enunciated,
clarified, confirmed, in their certain truths and excellence. And somehow
maybe, like, cosmetically cured, with distractions that only a good
arrangement can offer. It’s not true that an arrangement should always just be
felt and not heard. Sometimes an arrangement should definitely be heard. And
I’ve made great mistakes in miscalculating. Just as a personal aside,
something that I think is very important to say: you must reserve the right to
fail if you’re gonna get anything done. You must continue aggressively to
reserve the right to fail. You must keep learning from your failures. I see
that. I see how shy I was. When I could afford to be shy. Because I was a
brunette, and I had time to be shy. But soon you’ll tire of being shy, if you
are shy at all. If you’re that victimized by the degree of self-loathing
coming from your last failure. But you must continue to forgive yourself and
reserve the right to fail. So, what happens is, the extemporaneous process
then meets what’s pre-meditated. Arranging, to me, isn’t something like the
design of a camel with a committee. Basically, everybody’s gotta get lost
while you think about what it takes to arrange. You’re holding the bag. It’s
your job. You cannot, with the power of dialogue, do anything to ameliorate
the crisis that is imposed on the arranger. You must face that alone. It’s a
monastic process. And that is what I love about it. That it is collaborative,
but it’s also terrifically solitary and confining. Hermetically sealed, in the
case of my work a couple of days ago before I took the red-eye to Red Bull –
my first red-eye, by the way; interesting, life is so full, always something
new – but I did an arrangement in two days. But it felt like it could’ve been
a year. I was so frozen, immobilized, in front of a computer. I no longer
write because of an injury, from over-writing. Everything now is through
sequencing, by the way. I use Digital
Performer in my work as an
arranger. It’s a Luddite’s last refuge. I do it because it’s what I learned,
and many, many things come into play in arranging that improve the facility,
the speed of the event, but there’s always an important ingredient in that.
With that speed, comes the need for hesitation between inspiration and
execution. So, often I find myself doing even up to 24 bars, and I’ll finish
that, drink some wine after I’ve finished the meal and cleaned up between
every preparation – my wife thinks that “cook” is a noun – so between all of
those events, I might get up the next morning and just wipe out that 24 bars
and move on. So, I allow myself an arrangement of a song, and if you all are
interested in a song form, and surviving as an arranger, and I recommend it, I
allow myself five days for an arrangement, no matter whether it’s a banjo and
a Jew’s harp or an entire orchestra with a lot of vertical responsibilities.
Everybody has to have something to play. But I take those moments between
inspiration and execution very seriously. You must have time to give pause
while doing an arrangement. But both of those things fascinated me, you see,
the business of extemporaneous work. If you go on YouTube and you look up my
name – it’s Van Dyke, is my first name – and go “Ry Cooder.” If you punch in
the word “Hollywood,” “Ry Cooder Van Dyke Hollywood,” you’ll see a filmic
event that is absolutely... it’s gonna knock your socks off. It shows you how
I get, occasionally in life, to participate extemporaneously, and how much I
love it, how much joy it brings me. But that isn’t the luxury I usually have.
Usually, it’s sitting at home frozen in front of a computer and doing an
arrangement. I’ll tell ya something. I think it would really be good ...
what’s the next thing that’s up there? OK, so I go on from one thing or
another, but I finally get an opportunity to do what I do best, and that is I
like to articulate everything in strings. I use a lot of strings. I know it’s
very retro. But I love strings. To me, that’s heavenly engagement. I don’t
play a fretless instrument. I spent one semester in school on a cello, and it
was a painful experience for anyone who came close. It wasn’t until my son
played violin that I actually got a stringed instrument in my house. But this
shows what I do most commonly. This is an early attempt at an arrangement.
“One Meatball,” on Ry Cooder’s first album, which I co-produced. It’s called
“One Meatball,” the record Ry Cooder.
(music: Ry Cooder – “One Meatball”)
Arch-liberal. Kind of left-wing, liberal, tree-huggin’, Commie-sympathizin’,
lyrics there, from the Depression. All about the difference between being rich
and being poor, and I’ve been both in New York City, I guarantee you that. So
I understood the piece. And sometimes you notice that the violins at the top
would support the melody, of a person so circumspect and so in doubt about his
vocal ability that I felt it was appropriate to strengthen the melody.
Sometimes I do that with the first violins. Now, it’s interesting, are any of
you interested in string arrangements? OK, here’s the bit. This is what I do.
This is what I’ve found. I didn’t make this up, nobody taught me this. But
this is what I do. I always record with three violin lines. I divide them.
Three violins, two violas, one cello, and one bass. That’s what I do all the
time. And the reason for that is because, you see, with these five voices up
there, the three violins and the two violas, I can have triadic events, I can
have a line or an octave-duplicated line at the top, holding the thing
together while these three interior voices, that would be the third violins
and the two violas, all have a triadic opportunity. So what are you doing with
strings all of a sudden? These strings are getting bold and beautiful. There’s
a physicality there. [imitates a line] You don’t have to have a drummer
going [sings a drum fill]. You don’t have to keep returning to the ubiquity
of the trap set to get some rhythm. Maybe even if you put some rhythm in your
strings, a drummer can find a way to lay back. And still be involved, with
great economy. So that’s what I found out. Three violins, two violas, one
cello, one bass. Well, unfortunately, a violin is an instrument of infinite
approximate pitch. And if you put two violins together, you’re not really
doing them a favor, because you’re inviting intonational problems. So you must
have three. That unifies the field and it starts to sound like a note.
Sometimes that note is slightly out of tune; what the Brazilians call
“desafinado.” Agreeably out-of-tune. But that, to me, is the irreducible
minimum for an orchestrating with an arranger who wants to bring the heat of
the street into the parlor to meet the elite.
[laughter]
It’s nine violins and six violas, one cello will do, and one bass. My love for
strings, it was so born of my own intimidation about the fact that I’m not a
real musician, that everything I get musically just comes from blood, sweat,
and tears. I sweat bullets to come up with everything. It’s all due diligence
with me. I want to prove to you what this secret knowledge... going to a boy
choir school, learning music, listening to a lot of dead white guys, doing the
drill, crying a lot, not getting laid, being lonely, being a musician, it was
tough. To get the experience. To even enter the field of arranging. I want to
show you where all of this knowledge paid off. And the academic results became
clear. Please play “Good Vibrations.” One cello.
(music: The Beach Boys - “Good
Vibrations”)
So I went into a Beach Boys session, without any employment opportunity, went
in there, and thank God, it occurred to me to suggest that a cello play.
Tripletize fundamentals on the chorus. With a bow. And Brian Wilson reached
in the control room – with great control, he had; such great control, and the
gift of mutual empowerment, which is a requisite for any good musician – and
he got on that control button and he said to that cellist, who was somewhat
puzzled that he was looking at an empty music stand, and he said, “Jesse” – it
was Jesse Ehrlich was in the band a generation beyond us – “Jesse. Barko.”
Jesse looked up from the music stand. “Barko?” He said, “No, Brian. ‘Arco.’
With a bow. Arco, with a bow.” And this is what happened. And it became like
the ruby slippers that clicked in the The Wizard Of Oz. The signature shot
for that piece. And that got me eight months of infamous employment as a
lyricist. So you never know where music’s gonna take you, either. But that is,
you see, the power of the rhythmic potential of a string section. In that
case, it was just one player. But it speaks worlds about the physical
possibility in string rhythms. And I really love that world. It’s second
nature to me. I feel like a boy and a dolphin. When I go into that world, it
gives me all kinds of flotation. I just love it. And recommend it. As the
beginning for all your ideas. Now, how do I get there? You might be interested.
Let me give you a trade secret, the one I use. I was once a pianist, an able
pianist. I do everything in front of a keyboard now. I would be lost... I know
a great arranger, Lennie Niehaus. He does halftimes at Super Bowls and endless
numbers of play-ons and play-offs at Academy Awards show and so, a great tenor
sax man, and has insinuated himself into jazz literature, arranged for Stan
Kenton on a bus, with nothing else. Lennie would do an entire orchestration, I
watched him in process, and he would turn the page to the next four bars, a
full orchestra, and not have to look where he had left a flute, a second
flute, or a bassoon. He just kept going. Maddeningly talented. I don’t have
the problem of talent. I take a long time. But I find that it just disgusts me
how people privatize knowledge. I decided not to do that. I try to give away
what it is that I paid dearly to learn. And here’s such a lesson. If you’re a
pianist. You know, some of my favorite music of the American scene, and I had
one lesson conducted by Aaron Copland, for example – I mean, I’ve had some
great opportunities – somebody asked him, “What is American music?” He said,
“Well, it’s anything that was written in America.” Which I think is a
wonderful way to just wrap it up. It came from America. That’s what American
music is. So I think that there’s a desperate attempt to brand all kinds of
maverick music, whether it’s in America, of America, or just McWorld, which is
the American hegemony in its most giant, inappropriate form. The way to get
there, from here, in an arrangement, if you’re using strings – and then I’ll
wrap this up; I’m starting to sound like a dweeb, aren’t I? I don’t wanna
sound like a dweeb. I wanna be very hip.
[laughter]
But the way to get there is, if you’re a pianist, my favorite American music
is, let’s say, Gershwin. And my favorite Gershwin is, let’s just say, “Two-
Piano Gershwin.” And what you get in “Two-Piano Gershwin” it’s available
anywhere. I would listen to that if I were you, to see what happens in two
piano assaults. Very interesting, because you get a very detailed and specific
articulated left hands, and you also get all the decorative qualities that are
available in tenor events and so forth. This is the way I construct strings. I
get, basically, two treble-bass-braced pieces of information, and I study it.
And it’s from that that I deduct the strings. So, like, everything below a low
C is wiped out as I study the viola possibilities. Then everything below a low
G is wiped out as I study the violin possibilities. So it’s then, with
deductive reasoning, that you find yourself able to quickly – I mean, when
time is the money of love, and deadlines are deadly – this is an easy way to
get where you’re going. And I recommend it. That you try that technique, to
get quickly through a string arrangement.
BENJI B 
You touched on sort of classic American-sounding music, and of course, it is
very easy to just say, “Well, that’s any music from America,” but you have
been on record as sort of having a direct reaction against what you call the
Anglo-cization of music in the ’60s during the sort of Beatlesmania that was
going on. And if you could pick a style of music that was classically
American, I mean, you could do a lot worse than picking out The Beach Boys as
a classic sort of American sound. Seeing as you raised this classic
Smile session, which is probably one of the most folkloric recording sessions ever,
a lot of people said that, you know, had this album come out at the time, that
it would’ve been the American Sgt. Pepper’s, or the equivalent. Could you
paint us a picture of what it was like going into that environment, how you
met Brian Wilson and The Beach Boys, and really what those recording sessions
were like?
Van Dyke Parks 
Well, like I said, I mean, to wrap it up, what I learned was not so much
musical as it was social. The social lessons turned out to be absolutely
indelible. To see somebody, in this case, you see, I think the fascination is,
those who give a damn about anything pre-Elvis, the younger, looking back on
this, the most indelible impression I have is what came out of it as a social
lesson in how to make music. One guy was in charge, and that guy, he was the
most incredible... I mean, in terms of tonnage, he was the most powerful man
in music production. As a songwriter, publisher, group leader, arranger and so
forth. He sold more records than anybody. He was the top dog in the American
pop music scene. And I define “pop” as something that happened after popular
music died. And in that year, 1963, that year that Andy Warhol came out with
his Campbell’s soup can, all the arts went pop. It was a big deal in music, of
course. So being in a Beach Boys session was very much like that. All the
extemporaneous processes were played. The good thing about it is the usual
suspects always showed up. So, there were people that had played together,
there was a sense of what you call “repertory theater,” musically speaking.
Everyone had played together. They had a tacit relationship that was still
very dynamic. Everyone respected everyone. And they also expected the
unexpectable. And that’s what I remember about [it], a much-unexpected event
took place. I found myself once on my hands and knees playing the organ
pedals. It was just too much velocity was required. I had to. But you’ll hear
one of those organ notes in “Good Vibrations.” It’s almost sub-sonic. It’s
just too hard to find. We don’t need to go search it.
(music: The Beach Boys – “Good Vibrations” take #3 outtake)
[comments over music] But you notice there’s an economy in the ideas, you
see. This is chamber music, in a way. So I found that chamber sensibility very
refreshing. What it took was the ability for the musicians to go along gladly.
There was no time to feel superior. Nobody had time to feel superior. And I’ve
learned something from that. You see, I escaped serious music by getting into
un-serious music. Now, you see, you don’t have a problem with that. I don’t
believe you have a problem with that. I think you will find that you can be
taken seriously, even if you’re doing music that you might think is just being
thrown out there with feel-good potential. I think this is very interesting.
But when I was coming up, there was a definite demarcation between serious and
un-serious music. I wasn’t going to be serious about Edgar
Varèse anymore. I found
possibilities of musique
concrète right in that, if you
listen to “Good Vibrations,” just before that glottal “ah” that “ah” that
hit, where the tape is cut. I found musique concrète in popular music to be
much more interesting. I found non-serious music to have this political
potential. That it would make a difference to be involved with music to which
people were dancing, or communicating thoughtlessly. And to me that became the
hardball game. The one I wanted to be swinging in. And, in short, it was a
great opportunity. I was at the right time at the right place.
BENJI B 
And you wrote most of the lyrics on that album, right?
Van Dyke Parks 
Well, yeah. I wrote most of the lyrics. I found myself to be a lyricist, but
still able to make a musical contribution. And I don’t eat light bulbs. And I
do believe that old caution, that “by no title, merit nor honor is any true
man elated.” And I think that that extends to women, too. I think titles are
an absolute folly, when it comes to trying to figure out what comes from a
collective endeavor. And what I love about that music and, darn it, just about
everything that I’ve done in music that I can think of right now, it’s all,
ultimately, a collaborative confirmation. Isn’t that interesting?
BENJI B 
Let’s go further on that, and the difference between taking someone’s idea or
someone’s creation, and then doing your interpretation, i.e. arrangement, on
top of that, and the difference between being an artist yourself and the
creative pressure that comes from having to do it all from scratch. Because
after the Smile sessions were sort of abandoned, you recorded Song
Cycle. Is that
correct?
Van Dyke Parks 
Yeah, well, when I went on to a record called Song Cycle, and they sat on
it for a year, and it was ignominiously put on the shelf, and then it appeared
somehow, almost in a piratical move, on a juke box in Greenwich Village. I
went out and got an electromechanical reproduction of a coin going into a
machine. It reminded me of the time that I first put nickel in a jukebox. That
was called “Memories Are Made Of This,” the first time I ever put a nickel in
a jukebox. So I wanted the coin to go in, and then at the end, of course,
because I learned that it’s possible to turn tape around, the coin comes out
at the end. This I eviscerated, that is, I made waste of a beautiful diatonic
– a do-re-mi thing – that was written by a very unpopular, Donovan was his
name. They thought he was a Bob Dylan wannabe. And I felt kinda sorry for him,
but I was absolutely impressed by his piece, called Donovan’s
“Colours.” And I had at it, and
this was what came out of my madness.
(music: Van Dyke Parks – “Donovan’s
Colours” / applause)
So yeah, but it’s like Ted Turner said, “It only looks easy.” I had to start
with an ostinato. I didn’t know where it was going, I didn’t know when I would
return to it. But I started with a repeated figure on that simple tune called
“Donovan’s Colours.” The marimba, I thought, was very able. But nobody told me
that by having the tape speed, I might reach an octave. And I learned that
seat of the pants. And so I played the marimba part at half-speed and then
brought it up to speed. I wasn’t afraid to show my madness in that piece. I
wanted to follow it wherever it would take me. But I had been in the Mothers
Of Invention, and I had seen crazier people working out...
BENJI B 
Which was Frank Zappa’s band.
Van Dyke Parks 
...Frank Zappa’s group. So I had no fear of being considered insane. And
Warner Bros. got the results of that single record; I did it under a pseudonym
‘cause I wanted to protect my family from the infamy of my musical
criminology. I wanted to protect them, and I put that record out as George
Washington Brown, a fictitious pianist from South America.
[laughter]
They wouldn’t permit me to sign on at Warner Bros. with an album, so I used my
own name after that.
BENJI B 
I mean, the majority of that music at that time that you were involved with
does feel very experimental for the time. And pretty trippy, almost. I mean,
was it quite a psychedelic time at that period?
Van Dyke Parks 
 Well, I had some psilocybin. But I never participated in this LSD stuff
you’re talking about. And I don’t understand it when people talk about
psychedelia. They don’t know what they’re talking about, but it’s a good buzz
word.
[laughter]
Look at “Ice Capades” and you’ll see. This took me to the Moog synthesizer. I
was one of four boys in town that had one, and I did these commercials. And
this is when there was no keyboard. There was just a phalanx of wires, and you
put them together. You started out with pink noise. That is every “hhhhh,”
every sound in the audible spectrum. And you came up with a note. And maybe
that note would be, well, if it were an ambulance, it would be a sawtooth
wave, with a sine control voltage. You’ll hear what came out musically, where
this desire to experiment in the studio took me, in this Moog music.
(music: Van Dyke Parks – “Ice Capades (Moog Music ‘67)” / applause)
It was tough. It was tough. It was tough. It was tough. That was for a
commercial for Ice Capades. I actually did teach the synthesizer how to say
“Ice Capades.” And you go into a parking lot now, it says, “Please take the
ticket.” And you take artificial voices for granted. But in those days, I was
just thinking about the medical potential. This was before I even heard the
word “Stephen Hawking.” I thought that this might really have some serious
applications. I had too much to do to be psychedelic. I had to keep a roof
over my head. And I had to be an arranger, and I arranged for a lot of people.
Why don’t you play the one I did for Bonnie Raitt? This reveals my love for
calypso.
(music: Bonnie Raitt – “Wah She Go
Do”)
BENJI B 
So that was your work with Bonnie Raitt.
Van Dyke Parks 
 Yeah.
BENJI B 
And just going back to the album we played before, Song Cycle, which is
referenced by so many artists through the decades as like a really critically
acclaimed body of work. It’s fair to say that it’s not as commercially well-known as some of the other artists that you’ve worked with. I thought it’d be
interesting to talk a little bit about the difference between being the artist
and also being comfortable, as it seems, playing more of a background role in
music.
Van Dyke Parks 
 Well, “background” is a bad word to use. “Sidelines,” I think, is a good word
to use, OK? When you’re an artist, you can do anything. You only must be true
to yourself. And that truth shall make you whole. If you’re just true to
yourself. But when you’re working for somebody else, Jesus doesn’t give a damn
about that. You have an obligation to somebody else, and to serve them and
their expectations, however heightened they may be. So it’s the absence of
personality all of a sudden comes into play. You find that in film scoring,
especially. Being nobody is often very important, than trying to be somebody.
Being interested is essential. Being interesting is dullsville. I learned
that. I learned it the hard way. I became a record artist. All of a sudden I
found myself punished critically by being myself, being true to myself. But
ultimately, what I learned by being an artist brought me into such
understanding, I mean, that I became indispensable once present, to a lot of
people, in making their cases clear. Isn’t that something? So that’s the
difference to me. One is by being somebody. The other is by being nobody.
BENJI B 
I don’t like pulling up things that people have said before, but one quote
that I had to write down, was that you said, is that: “When somebody blew John
Kennedy’s brains out in the face of fame, I realized there might be some value
in anonymity.”
Van Dyke Parks 
That’s right. I think anonymity is a blessing. And it gives you a chance to
stop worrying. I mean, I’ve seen a lot of famous people. I don’t know, there
might be a lot of you who think that fame is indispensable to the very idea of
surviving in music. I don’t think it’s important. I’ve seen so many peers,
people my age, who spent a lifetime getting famous, and I see them walk into a
crowded room with two terrible things on their mind: one, what if everybody
notices me? And the other: what if nobody notices me? So it’s a problem, this
thing about fame. It looks to me like it’s the hangnail on every social
situation. You just: why do it? I don’t understand it. And anonymity has been
a blessing to me, as I’ve pursued this arranging career that I’ve had,
principally. I think it all shows that everything has served further my desire
to be part of the team. To be a good beta male. This is what I like about
arranging. It’s reactive more than creative. But I can’t really tell the
difference between those things. But I would say, by being willing to be
reactive, you get so much more done than if you’re in peril because someone
expects something creative out of you. And that applies to self-analysis, too.
By the way, just to let you know, I have pursued cliché so much to try to even
make it an art form. That’s part of, I think, what is my signature. To try to
just almost get to the unsueable offense, in quotation. I’ve wanted to be a
pirate. But you can’t really make a living being a pirate. You must do
something special with these stolen goods, these references you bring, in if
you’re going to become an artist in cliché. You saw what I did to Bonnie Raitt
on that song, basically that is a testament to women’s empowerment. Looking at
that field of calypso, which has been such a big part of my life, having to
follow a calypso steel band in a coffeehouse in Southern California, I learned
so much about good rhythms, real rhythms, not imagined rhythms, rhythms that
came from Africa. Look at this, I finally got where I wanted to be as a
producer for The Mighty Sparrow. One day, in a hurricane. Let’s go to “More
Cock.” By the way, one day, this entire album was done in one day. The Mighty
Sparrow went up to a piano and he did this [pats his left knee four times].
And the orchestra exploded into performance. I asked him about derivatives of
that rhythm, the merengue, baion, and so forth, and he told me that in
Trinidad, it’s like asking people what jazz means. Where did this come from,
this crooked beat that pushed the measure forward? And he said that in Curaçao
was the fable, was that, Curaçao, and a lot of people hold to it, that Peter
Stuyvesant, after he was governor general of Curaçao, came from the Caribbean,
came to be the governor general of New Amsterdam, he had a peg leg. One of his
knees was on a wooden stick. And the natives decided to popularize the
governor general’s gait in music. Here is “More Cock,” one day in a hurricane
in Miami.
(music: The Mighty Sparrow – “More
Cock”)
No literature. No literature at all. Same day.
(music: The Mighty Sparrow -
“Maria” / applause)
Mighty fine arranging by Earl, by the way, Earl Graham. So there’s a room that
sounded right away. The guy just went ‘boom-boom, boom-boom, bang!’ All during
Hurricane Edna, one day in 1971 in Miami. We were on independent generated
power. We got through a record in a day. And that’s from a record called Hot
And Sweet, by The
Mighty Sparrow. Reminding me about Earl Rodney, was the arranger of the piece,
about the power of arrangement in presenting a song. Now I just came up with
it. Let’s do something before we do this. Let’s go to “Spanish Moon.” This is
in the same year, 1971, with Little Feat, “Spanish Moon.”
(music: Little Feat - “Spanish Moon”)
BENJI B 
Is your approach to arranging brass kinda similar to the way that you approach
strings, or, I mean, is that a completely different beast?
Van Dyke Parks 
 No, no, no, that’s different. This is to a rhythm track. This arrangement is
to a rhythm track. I used the Tower Of Power, by the way. No, it’s different.
This is the genius of Lowell George, the late lament of my very good friend
Lowell. But all a part of that great American quiltwork we call Americana. I
learned so much from Lowell. I learned how to sit on a chord on this piece.
One of the greatest pieces I’ve ever heard is “Yes We Can,” by Allen
Toussaint, one of my very close friends. I produced his Southern Night
record, if you know that one. “Yes We Can.” One chord. Just to take a few
minutes and then we’ll be through with this show-and-tell. Here’s another
arrangement, a view of Americana. Let’s go to “The Parting Hand.” This is from
my new record, called Songs Cycle.
(music: Van Dyke Parks – “The Parting Hand” / Parks makes some inaudible
commentary at different points in the song / applause)
So that’s a song from 1886, a Sacred Harp Society hymnal, and that was my
reflections on that song of parting, that precious thing that I heard in the
mountains of North Carolina in my youth. So, always drawing on the Low Church,
the High Church, raping and running, doing all I can to reflect, to react to
these common, stolen goods we call Americana. That weaves throughout the
fabric of my work. Should we have some questions?
BENJI B 
We’re almost there. We’re almost there. You want to do questions now? You’re
bored of me already.
Van Dyke Parks 
 Actually, I would prefer to listen to music.
[laughter]
You know, I think it was Zappa who said, “Talking about music is like dancing
about architecture.”
BENJI B 
One thing I did want to get to before we open it out to questions is really
bringing it up to date. Because, of late, you’ve toured with Fleet Foxes, and
one of the more unusual collaborations that we should mention is you
collaborated with a young man named Skrillex. Tell us about how that came
about, and how a man of your musical stature approached a project like that.
Van Dyke Parks 
 Well, like I say, this is, once again, a lesson in caution against feeling
superior. I think that’s especially important if you really do have a great
musical ability. I think it invites arrogance. Because you know how damn good
you are. You’ve been told all your life. You’ve amazed people, maybe, with
signs of prodigy in your youth. Somehow you survived as a devoted musician.
You wonder if there’s ever going to be a real payoff. And I think in the
process you tend to overly self-protect, and that leads to feelings of, like,
auteur. Maybe like you might be too good for something that’s offered. That’s
just a common part of the human comedy. But in fact, I’ve spent a life of
taking that road that Yogi Berra said would lead to a fork, when I had to make
a decision, and the decision was based on two things. One is: am I too good to
do this? And the other is: am I up to doing this? And I’ve never been above
doing anything. If I’m not doing music, I do music. So when Skrillex called,
it was through an intermediary. A record company was... what do you call this?
A conference call. Some very protective vestigial organ called a record
executive was on the line, and here all of a sudden was Skrillex, and Skrillex
was calling from Belgium, it turned out. I said, “Where are you calling from,
Mr. Skrillex?” He said, “Skrillex!” “So where are you calling from?” He said,
“I’m in Belgium.” I said, “Well, what are you doing there?” He says, “I just
played a concert.” I said, “Oh really, for how many people?” He said, “Oh,
about 350,000 people.” I said, “Really? Did they come to see you?” He said,
“Yeah. They came to see me,” you know? I said, “Well, that’s very interesting.
Well, what do you do?” “I’m a DJ.” I said, “Well, that’s great.” I don’t know
what a DJ is, really. And I’m not proud of that. I said, “Well, that’s great.”
I said, “What can I do for you?” He said, “I want you to do an orchestration.”
I said, “OK. If you send it to me and I feel capable, I’ll do it.” He said,
“Oh great, Mr. Parks. We’ll destroy the world.”
[laughter]
“Great!” Put down the phone. What? “We’ll destroy the world.” We’re gonna
destroy the world with Skrillex. I go on one of these. I go on my laptop. I
YouTube, I get Skrillex. There he is in Belgium in front of 350,000 people.
Skrillex steps up to his laptop and he pours a beer on it. The crowd goes into
a state of erection.
[laughter]
They’re in ecstasy. And I think they’re on Ecstasy, too.
[laughter]
I mean, it’s madness. I don’t understand it. What am I doing here? But the mp3
came, and all of a sudden, it’s on a laptop, I have nothing else to do but a
wife asking me where her new shoes are. Or maybe the rent was late. I forget.
But there was no two ways about it. I was going to do this job. It confused me
a little when I ran into maybe 20 seconds of no chords. I thought maybe that
would create a dilemma, because maybe I would make the wrong decision. I was
at sea. And I must tell you that the results were, from the orchestra’s
standpoint, and that was quite an orchestra, we had to take out the partitions
at Capitol to expand the studio, A and B. They were all delighted. And as
amazed as I was, that we survived and landed on our feet. And why? The reason
we did this is because there were 350,000 unemployed European youth who were
desperate and hopeless and drugged and unable to find any transformation other
than through music. And I decided that it was a political obligation for me to
serve that man with all my heart. And that’s why I did that Skrillex session.
So I go into things with a totally unjudgmental attitude. I am slow to judge
and quick to praise. Anybody who makes music has got my vote. It beats bombs
in Baghdad. It beats munitions. It takes grit to be a musician. And it takes
the ability to serve people faithfully, and be slow to judge. And so all I can
tell ya is the check didn’t bounce and it had a comma in it.
[laughter / applause]
(music: Skrillex – “Skrillex Orchestral Suite Orchestral Suite” (performed by
Varien))
BENJI B 
That’s the bonus track on Skrillex’s Bangarang EP, as arranged by our guest
today. Before we open out to questions, you wanted to play something that
you’d brought in, right? From this CD.
Van Dyke Parks 
 Yeah. I think it’s good for people to know that it’s also a marvelous
opportunity to be involved with film scoring. And I do it on various levels.
And sometimes there’s no money. It might be with, like, a synthetic
arrangement, with dovetailed strings. Maybe I’ll get a violinist on top and a
cellist in the bottom to try to fool the discriminating listener into
believing that we have real music here. But this music is all orchestral. And
like I say, 800 copies were printed of The Super Chief. I hope that I can
get it released in the United States. But if that shouldn’t happen, I want you
to hear what my present tense is in movie scoring. Because I delight in it.
It’s a nice thing to know that the music is being used. It’s not being argued
down by some rock Nazi journalist. Who knows as much about a crucifixion as a
rabbit does about Easter Sunday. They leave you hanging there, folks. You
cannot make your case with critical acclaim or the defamatory remarks they
might make about your best effort. Just knowing you did your best often is
enough. So I did my best on these. Let’s look at “Two.” We played some of
“One” when these innocents came abroad.
(music: Van Dyke Parks – “Go West Young Man”)
On that last chord, I take an exception and divide the cellos into five
voices, on that sharp nine. Here is another, just a taste of this, to let you
know that I go on with this theme on track three. Same theme.
(music: Van Dyke Parks – “To The Dining Car” / applause)
I wish we had more time but thank you so much for indulging that.
BENJI B 
There’s a whole CD of this stuff, so we’ll play it after the session and we
can leave it playing. But for now, it’s question time. Don’t be shy. I’m sure
there’s plenty of things. Wait for the mic. Yes, sir.
Audience Member 
Hi. Thanks a lot for your lecture. Was very inspiring. And I felt very
identified with many things you said. I would like to compose music. I
normally make songs very often, and I don’t play them again. And many times,
people tell me that I should focus on something. But yeah, I like to make
music for, well, I’ve done cartoons and short films, but I’m kind of starting.
So I would like to know what you think about the importance of focusing on
some style, for example, and as you said, I don’t know, I feel very
comfortable at being nobody and trying to make something, maybe for the image,
or for the concept of other people. And I enjoy that process. So I want to
know about that. I also would like to know if you use any technique for making
your own script to organize the discords on your composition. Because, for
example, for me sometimes, I try to do not discord but, I don’t know, kind of
like tension chords, or intentions, throughout the song structure. And if you
can recommend any book about the experience of composing, or like a
continuation of your lecture through a book that I can read.
Van Dyke Parks 
Are you talking about songwriting, or composition in general?
Audience Member 
Composition in general.
Van Dyke Parks 
 Oh! You know, at the outset, it’s very interesting. Because it’s sad to say,
but don’t be disappointed. It’s sad to say the way cannot be told. The way
must be found. Damn it!
[laughter]
That’s the truth.
Audience Member 
I believe you, but I’m sure you may have some tips.
[laughter]
Van Dyke Parks 
 But I tell you, I haven’t found any instructive manual that prepares me for
music composition. The nice thing about having an opportunity to work on a
film, if you can find a colleague, a broke filmmaker who has no money to give
you, to put some music on his film, for example, what doing something with a
predestined through line. Oh, he has 20 minutes of music and no money. “OK,
I’ll do it.” And I do things like that. I do a lot of free stuff just to stay
engaged in music, and to try to learn. But it’s very helpful to find those
answers just by being thereand having the shock therapy of not being prepared
at all. What this has led me to is a contentment in one fact, and I know it
sounds like a cop-out, but I have found something which I think is an
indispensable lesson in music. You must know that you do not know. You must
know that. You can’t know nothing. When you enter the field. Because if you
have powers of prediction and so forth, I applaud that. Maybe you’re a
Presbyterian and know what tomorrow’s gonna bring. I don’t. I don’t know where
I’m going. You follow your madness, and you wobble through it. And I think
when people can recognize that, that’s what I think is the emotional content
of your work, is in not knowing. That you’re always painting yourself into a
corner. Sometimes you have to go back to that place where you went to a blind
alley, non-evolutionary musical event. And have to get back to where you were,
you know, 40 bars ago. But I think that it’s safe to say that you are as good
as your opportunities. And your opportunities can be improved if you engage
and don’t know, you find yourself ending up places you never could have
anticipated. And I think that’s the best, short, most productive, honest
answer.
Audience Member 
Thanks.
Van Dyke Parks 
OK. And I forgot to say, there was something I definitely should add, because
this was a highly biographical display. It’s a little embarrassing. We
should’ve just said, “The older I get, the better I was.”
[laugher]
Audience Member 
Hi. I would just like to say, collectively here, that we probably all feel the
same that I do right now, which is loving the human being that is you, and
thank you so much for existing, and being here, and speaking today. It’s been
indescribable. But I would like for you to elaborate a bit on what you said
about criticism within the music industry, and your journey dealing with that,
because what you said was quite profound, but very short.
Van Dyke Parks 
Well, you know, a lot of people don’t pay any attention to the static in the
bat cave, you know? And, of course, that’s what happens when you work and it
receives any public regard. Interesting! One of my favorite quotations is
attributable to Thomas Jefferson, who said, “If you reveal your depths, men
will ford your shallows.” You take that risk in music. You are stripped and
bleeding. You’re nude in front of the vulgar public gaze. If you reveal your
depths, they will ford your shallows. I think that, and also Sally Hemmings,
was probably the reason that Thomas Jefferson was, as they said, loathe to
unveil his true affections to the vulgar public gaze. But if you have
integrity, you do reveal yourself in your work. You reveal yourself
wholeheartedly. And better without hesitation. You know, it just comes with
the dinner. You have to take these positive and negative impulses, the static
in this bat cave of bloggery, which we now inhabit. Everybody’s got an
opinion. You know, I used to think a lot of democracy. Then I ran into airport
security on my way here. I don’t know. I somehow think it would’ve been better
to be a royal, before oil. But I find that it’s a distraction to consider what
people think of your work. But it’s inevitable. So let’s just face it. Let’s
look at the good, the bad, and the ugly. And let’s be informed by it all. When
I did my first record, some reviewer had the cheek to say that I had created
the Edsel of pop music. You know, if I had an Edsel today, I’d be a very
wealthy man. And at that time, that really got under my skin. It’s funny how
insults are so indelible. And faint praise is forgettable. But you have to go
ahead, you see. If this is what you were talking about. You have to accept
criticism. And, as a matter of fact, I think you can learn so much from it.
And I try to. And I don’t seek the company of people who necessarily agree
with me. I would rather have the detergent effect of testing my opinions with
people who are entirely at odds with me. I don’t feel like I’m preaching to a
choir here. I invite skepticism, and I think you all should, in your work. And
let it strengthen you, in your resolve. OK? Because courage is contagious, and
I wanna tell you something: I’m one tough old bird. Hasn’t killed me yet.
Audience Member 
Thank you.
Van Dyke Parks 
This is a very, very good thing. I would be lying to tell you this is Red
Bull [raising his glass]. But I’ve had some other thoughts about this. The
product of this endeavor. My son told me. I said, “What is Red Bull?” I mean,
I knew it was an energy, a field of energy. But I said to my son, my son is 30
-years-old, he’s a journalist, he’s also in an imploded industry. I said,
“What is Red Bull?” He said, “Well, Dad, look at it like this. They represent
the new patronage of music.” I said, “Really? That’s great.” He said, “In the
collapse of the record business, this is a fact.” So, in a field of forfeit,
this is win/win. Because I think the most significant thing that has happened
in my witness to music is that we’ve lost patronage. It’s not like the age of
Mozart, or the Medicis in Florence. We don’t have this. Nobody is helping us,
the way we want help. I mean, you’ve received some attention and some support
here, but it’s safe to say that there is no patronage in the arts. This, after
the presidency of George W. Bush, when somebody asked the man in the Oval
Office, they said, “Mr. President, what kind of music do you like?” He said,
“Music? I don’t like it.” He wasn’t kidding. And it shows now in the malaise
of American funding. They have ripped out the umbilicus between the arts and a
corporatized support, that is, without obligation. They’ve ripped that
umbilicus from what could really be a gestation of some great talent. I’m sure
the majority of you feel under-funded, and like you have opportunities that
you deserve that just aren’t appearing. And you haven’t had the good fortune
that I have had. But I guarantee perseverance will further. And we must find a
way out of this dilemma that is this age of no patronage of the arts. We must
find our way clear of this.
[applause]
